# Quals Challenge: Phasors to Stun #

**Category:** Communication System
**Relative Difficulty:** 1/5
**Author:** [Cromulence](https://cromulence.com/)

Demodulate the data from an SDR capture and you will find a flag. It's a
WAV file, but that doesn't mean it's audio data.


## Building ##

This repository contains two Docker images: The `generator` and `solver`.
You can build them both with:

```sh
make build
```

The resulting Docker images will be tagged as `phasor:generator`
and `phasor:solver`.

You can also build just one of them with `make generator` or `make solver`
respectively.

Building the `generator` container requires having already built the
`generator-base` container (see the `generator-base` folder).


## Deploying ##

This challenge has nothing to deploy. It's self-contained within the files
generated by the `generator`. See the top-level `README.md` for more
information on using the `generator` container.


## Testing ##

See top-level `README.md` file for more information on using the `solver`
container.


## Notes ##

An easy RF comms challenge that requires the demodulation of a baseband
signal that is the flag modulated using differential BPSK. Since its BPSK,
there are only two symbols to the modulator constellation, hence the phase
angle for all symbols is 0.    

**Building**

A gnuradio flowgraph is used to perform the modulation of the flag data. The
flowgraph is a python script and is partially generated from
gnuradio-companion. The output from gnuradio-companion is modified to create
the input file with the flag data that is used as a source in the flowgraph.
The output of the flowgraph is sample data in a wav file, which gives the
teams some knowledge of the sample rate and sample format (floats). 

**Solving**

Another gnuradio flowgraph is used to demonstrate that the challenge can be
solved. Since this is a baseband signal, the flowgraph is pretty trivial and
there are no channel effects, noise, or other perturbations to the signal.  
