# Quals Challenge: Ground Control to Major Tom #

**Category:** Communication System
**Relative Difficulty:** 4/5
**Author:** [Red Balloon Security](https://www.redballoonsecurity.com/)

You killed that last one. Ready to take it to the next level?


## Building ##

This repository contains two Docker images: The `generator` and `solver`.
You can build them both with:

```sh
make build
```

The resulting Docker images will be tagged as `major_tom:generator`
and `major_tom:solver`.

You can also build just one of them with `make generator` or `make solver`
respectively.

Building the `generator` container requires having already built the
`generator-base` container (see the `generator-base` folder).


## Deploying ##

This challenge has nothing to deploy. It's self-contained within the files
generated by the `generator`. See the top-level `README.md` for more
information on using the `generator` container.


## Testing ##

See top-level `README.md` file for more information on using the `solver`
container.


## Notes ##

In both cases a hint should be given that the signals are transmitted at
2205 bps and that the QPSK is gray coded.

* The contestant is given a .wav file.
* Using gnu-radio, Matlab or another demodulation tool, they demodulate
  the signal encoded in the .wav to get a sequences of bits.
* To demodulate the signal they will have to perform investigative
  transforms and probably use visual tools to see that it is QPSK encoded.
  Gnu-radio has a specific tutorial on how demodulate QPSK.
* The QPSK signal is grey coded, which leaves 8 possible symbol mappings,
  the correct one is 0, 1, 3, 2. This will probably have to be a guess and
  check solution.
* From there they convert the bits to a binary format.
* The binary comes back as a set of CCSDS Telecommand packets that have to
  be parsed out.
* From the parsed binary it should be apparent that it is correctly decoded
  based on the song lyrics and the JPG header.
* Open the JPG and find the flag.
