@c %**start of header
@c This is for the man page:
@setfilename vmips.info
@settitle VMIPS R3000-based MIPS simulator (running and customizing)
@c %**end of header

@ignore
@c man begin SEEALSO
as(1), ld(1), gdb(1), 
and the Info entries for @file{vmips}, @file{gcc}, @file{as},
@file{ld}, @file{binutils} and @file{gdb}.

Important: The information in this man page is an extract from the full
documentation of the VMIPS simulator, and is limited to the meaning of
the command-line options. If you didn't find what you were looking for here,
or you want more information, please refer to the Info file @file{vmips}
or the VMIPS Programmer's Manual.  Both are made from the Texinfo source
file vmips.texi.
@c man end
@c man begin BUGS
For instructions on reporting bugs, see
the "Reporting Bugs" appendix of the Info manual.
@c man end
@c man begin AUTHOR
VMIPS was written by Brian Gaeke.
@c man end
@c man begin COPYRIGHT
@include copyright.texi
@c man end
@c man begin DESCRIPTION
When you invoke vmips, it loads a ROM file specified on the command line,
initializes and resets the MIPS processor, and begins execution at the first
address of the ROM file, which is normally loaded at address 0xbfc00000.
@c man end
@end ignore

@c DESCRIPTION ENVIRONMENT NOTES FOOTNOTES COPYRIGHT
@node Invoking vmips, Customizing, Building Programs, Top
@chapter Invoking vmips

VMIPS is started by running the "vmips" program from the command line.
The format of the VMIPS command line is any one of the following:

@c man begin SYNOPSIS
@example
vmips [-n] [-F FILE] [-o option_string] ... rom_file
vmips --help
vmips --version
vmips --print-config
@end example
@c man end

@c man begin OPTIONS
This is what the different command line options mean:

@table @samp
@item -F FILE
Read options from FILE instead of the @file{.vmipsrc} in your home directory.

@item -n
Do not read the system-wide configuration file, usually called
@file{/usr/local/etc/vmipsrc}.

@item --help
Prints a short summary of VMIPS command line options, and exits
successfully.

@item --version
Prints a short summary of VMIPS version and copyright information,
and exits successfully.

@item --print-config
Prints a short summary of VMIPS compile-time configuration information,
and exits successfully.

@item -o something
Set the option "something" as if "something" were in your
.vmipsrc file.  See the "VMIPS options" section of the
"Customizing" chapter for more information on what kind
of things can go in your .vmipsrc file. You can use as many
-o options on the command line as your shell will let you.

@cindex ROM, selecting file for
@item rom_file
Use the named file as the ROM file VMIPS should boot. This
option is mandatory.
@end table
@c man end

@c man begin FILES
@node Customizing, Invoking vmipstool, Invoking vmips, Top
@chapter Customizing

@section VMIPS options

The VMIPS simulator gets runtime options from four different sources,
in this order: first, it checks its compile-time defaults, which are
set by the site administrator in the source file @file{optiontbl.h}. Then,
the system-wide configuration file is read, unless you specify the @samp{-n}
option; usually this file is called
@file{/usr/local/etc/vmipsrc}, but it may have been moved by the site
administrator or by the maintainers of your distribution.
(This is configurable in the source file @file{options.h}, and
by specifying the --prefix and --sysconfdir options to the GNU
@command{configure}
script when building VMIPS.) Next, it checks the user's own configuration
file, usually the file @file{.vmipsrc} in your home directory, or whatever
file you specify using the @samp{-F} option. Last, it
reads the command line, and gets any options listed there.

@section Format of the configuration file

The configuration file may contain as many options per line as you want,
provided no single line exceeds 1,024 characters in length.  Whitespace
separates options from one another.  Single quotes and backslash are valid
in the configuration file. Their meanings are similar to those found in
the Bourne shell: any text within paired single quotes is uninterpreted,
as is any character immediately following a backslash.  A comment is
any text starting from a hash mark to the end of the line, inclusive.

A string or number option named NAME can appear as NAME=VALUE, where VALUE
is the string or number in question.  If the number begins with 0x, it will
be interpreted as a 32-bit hexadecimal number, and if it begins with 0,
it will be interpreted as octal. Otherwise, it will be interpreted as a
decimal number. Numbers are always unsigned. A Boolean option named NAME
can appear as either NAME (to set it to TRUE) or noNAME (to set it to FALSE).

@section Summary of configuration options

The following is a list of the configuration options present in this
version of VMIPS.

@c This part of the manual is automatically generated by `makeoptdoc'.
@include options.texi
@c man end
