\input texinfo      @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename vmips.info
@settitle VMIPS Programmer's Manual
@c %**end of header
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex pg cp

@dircategory Development
@direntry
* VMIPS: (vmips).                A MIPS R3000 simulator.
@end direntry

@ifinfo
This is the VMIPS Programmer's Manual, Sixth Edition, for version 1.5.

Copyright @copyright{} 2001, 2002, 2004, 2009, 2014, 2018 Brian R. Gaeke.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@center @titlefont{VMIPS Programmer's Manual}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@end titlepage

@node Top, Overview, , (dir)
@top
This is the VMIPS Programmer's Manual, Sixth Edition, for version 1.5.

Copyright @copyright{} 2001, 2002, 2004, 2009, 2014, 2018 Brian R. Gaeke.
For information about copying, modifying or distributing this manual,
please see the chapter called `Copying'.

@menu
* Overview::              The rationale for VMIPS.
* Getting Started::       4 simple steps to building VMIPS programs.
* An Example::            Hello, World on VMIPS.

* Building Programs::     What you need to know when compiling for VMIPS.
* Invoking vmips::        Starting and stopping the simulation.
* Customizing::           The @file{.vmipsrc} file.
* Invoking vmipstool::    A handy front-end to MIPS compiler tools.
* Programming::           Tips on writing assembly language programs.
* Debugging::             VMIPS supports debugging with GDB.
* Interaction::           You can inspect machine state without a debugger.
* Devices::               Virtual hardware supported by VMIPS.
* Monitor::               VMIPS comes with a simple ROM monitor.
* Extending::             Writing new functionality for VMIPS.
* Test Suite::            Making sure VMIPS works as designed on your platform.

* Installation::          Getting VMIPS ready to boot on your machine.
* Reporting Bugs::        What to do when vmips dumps core, or worse.
* Future Directions::     VMIPS is looking for a few good hackers.
* Release History::       Annals in the history of VMIPS.
* References::            Good books about MIPS.

* Copying::               VMIPS is free software, and its documentation
                          is free documentation.

* Index::
@end menu

@comment node-name, next,          previous, up
@node Overview, Getting Started, Top, Top
@chapter Overview

@cindex simulator
@cindex virtual machine
@cindex MIPS
@cindex MIPS R3000
VMIPS is a simulator for a machine compatible with the MIPS R3000 RISC
architecture. VMIPS consists entirely of software. No special hardware is
required to run programs on VMIPS---that is, VMIPS is a virtual machine.

@cindex RISC
@cindex RISC architecture
@cindex architecture
Since VMIPS is based on an already-existing architecture, it is relatively
easy to find tools to build programs that will run on VMIPS. Since VMIPS is
based on a RISC architecture, its primitive machine-language commands are
all fairly simple to understand and implement.

VMIPS is easily extended by programmers to include more virtual devices,
such as frame buffers, disk drives, etc. VMIPS is written in C++ and uses
a fairly simple class structure. Furthermore, VMIPS is intended to be a
``concrete'' virtual machine which its users can modify at will---``concrete''
meaning that it maintains a tight correspondence between its structures
and structures which actually appear in modern physical computer hardware.
For example, a programmer who wished to modify the CPU simulation could
easily extract the @code{CPU} class from the VMIPS source code, and replace
it with one which was more to his/her liking.

@cindex debugger
@pindex gdb
VMIPS is also designed with debugging and testing in mind, offering an
interface to the GNU debugger GDB by which programs can be debugged while
they run on the simulator. As such, it is intended to be a practical
simulator target for compilers and assembly language/hardware-software
interface courses.

@cindex free software
VMIPS is free software. This means that you are free to share VMIPS
with everyone, and we encourage you to do so, but we do not give you
the freedom to restrict others from sharing it with everyone. For a
comprehensive explanation please read the GNU General Public License.

@node Getting Started, An Example, Overview, Top
@chapter Getting Started

Step 0. If VMIPS is installed on your system, you can start building
programs with it right away.  Otherwise, you (or your system
administrator) will have to compile VMIPS first; see the appendix on
Installation.

@cindex vmipstool usage
@pindex vmipstool
@pindex vmips
Step 1. First, compile your program. You should have a MIPS cross-compiler
available.  VMIPS supports the GNU C Compiler; most installations of
VMIPS will also have an installation of the GNU C Compiler targetting
the MIPS architecture.  Your easiest interface to the C compiler will
probably be through the @samp{vmipstool} program; to run the MIPS compiler
that VMIPS was installed with, use the @samp{vmipstool --compile} command.

@cindex linking, using vmipstool
@cindex script, linker
Step 2. Link your program with any support code necessary. VMIPS comes
with some canned support code, in the share/vmips directory, or you
can write your own support code. VMIPS comes with a linker script for
simple standalone programs, which you can run with @samp{vmipstool --link},
or you can write your own linker script.

@cindex ROM, building with vmipstool
Step 3. Build a ROM image. This is necessary because the current version of
VMIPS does not read in executables. Most real machines don't; they have
an embedded program on a piece of flash ROM that reads in the first
executable and runs it. This makes development a little more realistic, but
not quite so convenient; this may change in the future, but for now it's
necessary. To build a ROM image, use the script that comes with VMIPS, by
running @samp{vmipstool --make-rom}.

@cindex simulation, starting
Step 4. Start the simulator using @samp{vmips ROMFILE}, where @samp{ROMFILE} is
the name of your ROM image.  Your program should run to completion,
and if you are using the canned setup code that comes with VMIPS, 
the simulator should halt when it hits the first @code{break} instruction, which
should happen right after your @code{entry} function returns.

@node An Example, Building Programs, Getting Started, Top
@chapter An Example

@pindex vmipstool 
@pindex vmips
Let's assume you have VMIPS already compiled, and that you have some
setup code in @file{setup.s}, and a standalone program (i.e., not one
meant to run under an operating system) in @file{hello.c}.

@cindex assembling, using vmipstool
First assemble the setup code.
@example
vmipstool --assemble -o setup.o setup.s
@end example

@cindex error, installation
Note: if you get an `installation error' from vmipstool, you may need to edit
your @file{/etc/vmipsrc} the first time you use vmipstool.  See the
`Post-Installation Setup' section of the `Installation' appendix for more
information.

@cindex compiling, using vmipstool
Compile your program:
@example
vmipstool --compile -c hello.c
@end example

@cindex linking, using vmipstool
Then, link your program and the setup code together to produce an executable:
@example
vmipstool --link -o hello setup.o hello.o
@end example

@cindex ROM, building with vmipstool
Build a ROM image from the executable:
@example
vmipstool --make-rom hello hello.rom
@end example

Run the program.
@example
vmips hello.rom
@end example

@cindex simulation, halting
The program will terminate, by default, when your setup code generates
a breakpoint exception (using the @code{break} instruction, for
example). This termination condition can be changed by adding one of the
@option{halt} options to the file @file{.vmipsrc} in your home directory.

@node Building Programs, Invoking vmips, An Example, Top
@chapter Building Programs

@section Source Languages

@cindex C language
Programs for VMIPS are generally built out of C or assembly-language source
code. It is theoretically possible to use C++ or other languages, but the
infrastructure required has not yet been investigated or documented.

@section ROM Programs

@cindex ROM, programs in
The easiest way to get VMIPS to run a program is to install that program as
the VMIPS ROM. Building a C program as a ROM requires that you link it with
some setup code.

@section Default Setup Code

@cindex setup code
@cindex startup code
@cindex initialization code
This section describes the default VMIPS setup code.  It also describes
the minimal set of things you need to do before you can run C code
from the ROM, since that is the intended purpose of the default VMIPS
setup code.

@cindex TLB, initializing
Start by clearing out registers and initializing TLB entries.
The default VMIPS setup code sets up an identity virtual-to-physical
address mapping in the TLB with valid entries for the first few pages
of physical RAM.

@cindex stack pointer, initializing
Set yourself up a stack pointer ($sp). Usually this can just be some
number of megabytes above the end of your code's data segment.  You can
get the address of the end of your code's data segment from your linker
script.

@cindex globals pointer, initializing
Set up your globals pointer ($gp), if your code uses global data.
You can get the right address from your linker script.

@cindex ROM, data in
If you have writable data in ROM, your C code probably doesn't realize
that it's in ROM, and it will want to write to it. You should copy the
writable data to RAM. There is code to do this in the canned setup code
provided with VMIPS.

@cindex memory size
Note: The canned setup code is hard-wired for 1 MByte of memory. It
operates with a very simple memory map: writable data and bss
(uninitialized data) above @code{DATA_START}, and the stack grows down
from @code{DATA_START}.  The linker script and the canned setup code
share some hard-wired constants related to this memory map; you should be
careful to coordinate your changes if you wish to change the memory map.

@findex main
@findex entry
Finally, your setup code should finish by calling the entry point of your
C code. Usually this will have a name like @code{entry}; using the name
@code{main} is not recommended, because many versions of GCC assume that
they can call standard C runtime setup functions (such as are normally
found in @file{crt0.o}) from the beginning of @code{main}. You may or
may not want this.

@cindex break instruction, to halt machine
When the C code returns, you will probably want to halt the machine;
the default way to do this is by executing a break instruction. Read the
following section for details.

@section Exceptions

@subsection Handling exceptions

@cindex exceptions, handling
Your startup code should have some kind of exception support.  If you
don't, exceptions are likely to make your program loop forever, because
the jump to the exception vector will result in the execution of garbage
or in a unmapped access, either of which are likely to cause exceptions.

@cindex exceptions, minimal handler for
@cindex break instruction, to halt machine
An absolutely minimal exception handler is a break instruction at address
0xbfc00180, which will halt the machine on any exception, providing
you have the @option{haltbreak} option set. This is also a handy way to halt
the machine after your program ends, if you are writing kernel code;
just follow the jump to your kernel code by a @code{break} instruction.

@subsection Exception vectors

@cindex exceptions, vectors for
@cindex exceptions, addresses for
If the Boot-time Exception Vectors are in use, exceptions use the
base address 0xbfc00100 (which is in unmapped, uncached kernel space),
otherwise they use the base address 0x80000000 (which is in unmapped,
cached kernel space).  You can control this by setting or clearing the
Boot-time Exception Vector bit (bit 22, or 0x00400000) in the Status
register (register 12 of coprocessor zero). If the bit is set, the
Boot-time Exception Vectors will be used.

@cindex exceptions, user-space TLB miss
User-space TLB Miss exceptions have a special vector, which is obtained by
adding 0 to the base address. All other exceptions use the general vector,
which is obtained by adding 0x080 to the base address. This obviously
places a bit of a restriction on the layout of the beginning of your ROM code:
the setup code must either fit in the first 0x100 bytes, or it must be structured
so that it jumps past the exception vectors.

@subsection Exception codes and their meanings

@cindex exceptions, codes for
Whenever control is transferred to your exception handler, the ExcCode
field of the Cause register, that is, bits 6 - 2 (0x007c) of register 13
of coprocessor 0, are filled in with one of the following exception codes.
Each exception code has a canonical short name, included in parentheses next
to the exception code number, and is followed by a short description of the
circumstances where it occurs.

@table @code
@item 0 (Int)
Hardware or software interrupt. Some device or process is trying to get
the processor's attention.

@item 1 (Mod)
TLB modification exception. The memory address translation mapped to a TLB
entry, but that entry's ``dirty'' bit was set.

@item 2 (TLBL)
TLB exception caused by a data load (i.e., a load word or similar
instruction) or instruction fetch. The memory address translation did
not match any valid TLB entry.

@item 3 (TLBS)
TLB exception caused by a data store (i.e., a store word or similar
instruction). The memory address translation did not match any valid TLB
entry.

@item 4 (AdEL)
Address error exception caused by a data load or instruction fetch. The
PC was not word-aligned, or the address the load instruction wanted to
load from was not aligned to the width of the load instruction. (For
example, load halfword instructions must be 2-byte aligned.)

@item 5 (AdES)
Address error exception caused by a data store. The address the store
instruction wanted to store to was not aligned to the width of the store
instruction. (For example, store halfword instructions must be 2-byte
aligned.)

@item 6 (IBE)
Bus error caused by an instruction fetch. The PC does not correspond to
any real area of memory.

@item 7 (DBE)
Bus error caused by a data load or store. The target address of the load
or store instruction does not correspond to any real area of memory.

@item 8 (Sys)
SYSCALL exception. Some code was trying to call the operating system,
using a SYSCALL instruction.  This exception is the processor's way of
transferring control to the operating system.

@item 9 (Bp)
Breakpoint exception. Some process executed a BREAK instruction. This is the
processor's way of allowing the operating system to stop the process and do
whatever is appropriate (alert the user using the debugger, for example).

@item 10 (RI)
Reserved instruction exception. Some code executed something which wasn't
a valid MIPS-1 instruction.

@item 11 (CpU)
Coprocessor Unusable. Some code executed an instruction which tried to
reference a coprocessor that isn't configured in VMIPS.

@item 12 (Ov)
Arithmetic Overflow.  Some code executed an instruction whose arithmetic
answer was too big to fit in a register using two's-complement arithmetic. The
processor issues this exception so that the operating system can stop or
otherwise signal the process.

@item 13 (Tr)
Trap. This exception is only issued on the R4000 or R6000 processor and
compatibles.

@item 14 (NCD)
LDCz or SDCz (coprocessor load/store) using an address which wasn't in
the cache. This exception is only issued on the R6000 processor and compatibles.

@item 14 (VCEI)
Virtual Coherency Exception (instruction). This exception is only issued on
the R4000 processor and compatibles.

@item 15 (MV)
Machine check exception. This exception is only issued on
the R6000 processor and compatibles.

@item 15 (FPE)
Floating-point exception. This exception is only issued on
the R4000 processor and compatibles.

@item 16-22
Reserved, not used.

@item 23 (WATCH)
Reference to WatchHi/WatchLo address detected. This exception is only issued
on the R4000 processor and compatibles.

@item 24-30
Reserved, not used.

@item 31 (VCED)
Virtual Coherency Exception (data). This exception is only issued on
the R4000 processor and compatibles.
@end table

@subsection Exception prioritizing

It is possible for more than one exception to occur during the emulation
of the same instruction.  The MIPS architecture has a system for
determining which of a set of conflicting exceptions is reported to
the exception handler.
 
When two or more exceptions occur on the same execution of the same
instruction, only one is reported, according to the priority
list, below. The ordering is by exception code (EXCCODE) and mode of memory
access (MODE), where applicable. Each ordered pair (EXCCODE, MODE)
below has the priority listed in brackets. * denotes a position where
any value matches.

This prioritization is implemented in the @code{exception_priority()}
member function of class CPU.

@table @code
@item [1]
Address error - instruction fetch 
(AdEL, INSTFETCH)

@item [2]
TLB refill - instruction fetch
TLB invalid - instruction fetch 
(TLBL, INSTFETCH)
(TLBS, INSTFETCH)

@item [3]
Bus error - instruction fetch
(IBE, *)

@item [4]
Integer overflow, Trap, System call, Breakpoint, Reserved
Instruction, or Coprocessor Unusable
(Ov, *)
(Tr, *)
(Sys, *)
(Bp, *)
(RI, *)
(CpU, *)

@item [5]
Address error - data load or data store
(AdEL, DATALOAD)
(AdES, *)

@item [6]
TLB refill - data load or data store
TLB invalid - data load or data store
(TLBL, DATALOAD)
(TLBS, DATALOAD)
(TLBL, DATASTORE)
(TLBS, DATASTORE)

@item [7]
TLB modified - data store
(Mod, *)

@item [8]
Bus error - data load or data store
(DBE, *)

@item [9]
Interrupt
(Int, *)
@end table

@section Linking

You want the text section of your program to start with the setup
code, so link in the setup code first --- that is, put the name of the
object file containing the setup code first on the linker command line.

You want the setup code to start at 0xbfc00000, which is the MIPS
reset exception vector. In practical terms, when VMIPS starts up,
it will reset. When VMIPS resets, it jumps to 0xbfc00000, which is
the beginning of your setup code. 

@section Common Errors in Compilation

If the linker complains about not being able to find the
symbol @code{_gp_disp}, you should turn on the GCC option
@option{-mno-abicalls}. @code{_gp_disp} is used by the SGI N32 ABI for
MIPS ELF.  One reliable reference source claims, ``@code{_gp_disp} is
a reserved symbol defined by the linker to be the distance between the
lui instruction and the context pointer.'' The GNU linkers currently in
use do not appear to support this function.

If you get lots of @code{R_MIPS_GPREL16} relocation failures from
the linker, there are two workarounds: either combine all the files
together first with @samp{ld -x -r -o bigfile.o @var{<all your files>}}
and then use @samp{vmipstool --link} on @file{bigfile.o}, or compile
with @option{-G 0} in your @code{CFLAGS}.

@subsection Dealing with kernel code in GCC

If you have a @code{main()} function in your code, GCC expects it to
return an int.  If you don't like this, use @option{-ffreestanding}
or @option{-Wno-main}. You have to have GCC 2.95.2 or later for this to
work, though; it won't work in EGCS 1.1.1.

If you have a @code{main()} function in your code, GCC will try to
call @code{__main} or some other kind of setup function even if you
use @option{-ffreestanding}.  If you don't want this call made, a
simple workaround is to call the entry function @code{entry} instead
of @code{main}. You can also try defining @code{void __main(void)}
to be an empty function.

@subsection MIPS position-independent code

In Linux/MIPS, PIC (position-independent code) is the default.
An important implication is that GCC configured for @code{mips-linux}
or @code{mipsel-linux} will, by default, use the @code{$gp} register
to access global variables. This is fine in most user programs,
but you may find that it causes you trouble if you are writing a ROM
for use in VMIPS because the @code{$gp} register may not contain a
valid pointer. The easiest thing to do is turn off this behavior by
giving gcc the @option{-fno-pic} option, which also turns on the gas
@option{-non_shared} option.  If you compile with vmipstool, it will
turn on these flags for you by default.

In many MIPS operating systems, register @code{$t9} is reserved for the
ABI as a globals pointer when compiling position-independent code, and
the assembly writer (programmer or compiler) must issue @code{.cpsave}
and @code{.cprestore} assembler directives upon function entry and exit
to put the right globals pointer values into this register. Similarly
to the @option{-fno-pic} option above, it is easy to turn this off while
writing ROM code by using the gcc @option{-mno-abicalls} option. If you
compile with vmipstool, it will turn this flag on for you by default.

@subsection Building ROMs

If it takes a long time to build a ROM or the ROM file fills the disk,
make sure all the sections your linker is producing are accounted for
in the linker script. Do an @samp{objdump -x} on the executable which
you are using to build the ROM image, and make sure that the difference
between any two of the LMAs (load memory addresses) of the sections
in the file is not a lot bigger than the total size of the executable.
This metric is strictly a rule of thumb, but it easily identifies when
a section has not been put into the linker script: if a load memory
address for some section is expecting to be in RAM (0xa0000000, for
example), and the load memory address for all the other sections is in
ROM (around 0xbfc00000), then you will lose because writing out a memory
image to be used as a ROM file would take roughly 0xbfc00000 - 0xa0000000
= 532676608 bytes (about 500 megs). The solution is to make sure that
all LMAs in the executable are sane with respect to the @samp{loadaddr}
variable in your @file{.vmipsrc}, usually by adding any new sections
you find to either the .text, .data, or .bss section of the linker script.

@c This file is where the Invoking vmips and Customizing nodes are to be
@c found.  They are also used to create the vmips(1) man page.
@include invoke.texi

@c This file is where the Invoking vmipstool node is to be
@c found.  It is also used to create the vmipstool(1) man page.
@include vmipstool.texi

@node Programming, Debugging, Invoking vmipstool, Top
@chapter Programming

In this section we attempt to give some hints about writing code for
VMIPS.  They are primarily intended for assembly language programmers,
but should be helpful to anyone interested in the MIPS
architecture. This section will not replace a good MIPS reference; check
the ``References'' section for more information about these. However, any
help is appreciated for making this section more complete.

@section Delay slot handling

MIPS branch instructions' effects are delayed by one instruction;
the instruction following the branch instruction is always executed,
regardless of whether the branch is taken. This is a consequence of
the pipeline which is not important to virtual machine architecture,
except that it has to be emulated correctly.

VMIPS emulates delay slot handling by means of a tiny state machine, whose
state is called the delay state.  The virtual CPU can be in a delay state
of @code{DELAYING}, @code{DELAYSLOT}, or @code{NORMAL} at the beginning
of the call to @code{step()}. The VMIPS delay slot state machine's state
is displayed when you use the @option{dumpcpu} option. See the ``Summary
of configuration options'' section of the ``Customizing'' chapter for more
information about this option.

A delay state of @code{NORMAL} corresponds to execution in the non-branch case.

A delay state of @code{DELAYING} means that the instruction being executed
caused a branch to be taken, and the next instruction to execute is in
the delay slot. 

A delay state of @code{DELAYSLOT} means that the instruction just executed
was in the delay slot, and the next instruction to execute is the
branch target.  If there is an exception, the exception PC will be the
PC of the branch instruction, not of this one.

@node Debugging, Interaction, Programming, Top
@chapter Debugging

@cindex debugging
VMIPS supports debugging programs running on the virtual machine by
providing an interface to GDB, the GNU debugger.  GDB talks to VMIPS using
its built-in remote serial protocol, over a local TCP connection.  See the
``Remote Serial'' section of the GDB manual for details of the protocol.

You must use a MIPS-targetted GDB to debug programs running on VMIPS;
that is, you must use a copy of GDB that understands MIPS assembly
language and registers.  Usually, a copy of GDB configured this way will
have a name starting with @file{mips}, e.g., @file{mipsel-ecoff-gdb}.
See the ``Installation'' section of the manual for more information on
configuring and building a MIPS-targetted GDB.

If you want to use the VMIPS GDB interface, set the @samp{debug}
flag on the command line. VMIPS will wait for you to attach GDB and type
@samp{continue} at the GDB prompt before booting the ROM file.

To attach GDB to VMIPS, look for the line in the VMIPS startup message that
reads:

@example
Use this command to attach debugger: target remote 127.0.0.1:3371
@end example

Make a note of the @command{target remote} command VMIPS printed out.
The host and port numbers (@samp{127.0.0.1:3371}) are likely to be
different on your machine than are shown here. If you want to force
a particular port to be used, specify the @option{-o debugport=PORT}
option when starting VMIPS.

When VMIPS pauses and says @samp{Waiting for connection from debugger},
open up GDB in another window or on another terminal on the program you
are debugging. Do not try to open GDB on the ROM file, because GDB doesn't
understand ROM files. Instead, give GDB the name of the executable you
used as input when creating the ROM file. For best results, it should have been
compiled with @option{-g}, so that it will contain extra debug information,
and should not have had @command{strip} run on it.

Once GDB is open, type in to GDB the @command{target remote} command that
VMIPS printed out. GDB will connect to VMIPS, which will be stopped at
the first instruction of your setup code. Then you can set breakpoints,
single step, or just let the program continue. VMIPS will return control
to GDB on exceptions.

If you change your mind while VMIPS is waiting for a debug connection,
type Control-C to VMIPS to cancel.

Here is what the whole setup process looks like in VMIPS:

@iftex
@c A lot of these examples are too wide for regular @example.
@c This block is a dumb hack to make *this particular* @example use the regular
@c margins. See the definition of @cartouche to see how it works.
@begingroup
@let@nonarrowing=@comment
@end iftex

@example
% ./vmips -o debug boot.rom
Auto-size ROM image: 4096 words.
Running self tests.
Little-Endian host processor detected.
Self tests passed.
Use this command to attach debugger: target remote 127.0.0.1:33891
Mapping ROM image (boot.rom): 4096 words at 0xbfc00000 [1fc00000]
Attached SerialHost(fd 5) at 0x808cab8 to SPIMConsole [host=0x808cac8]
Attached SPIMConsole [host=0x808cac8] to phys addr 0x2000000
Connecting IRQ2-IRQ6 to console.
Mapped (host=0x401a4008) 1024k RAM at base phys addr 0

*************RESET*************

Waiting for connection from debugger.
@end example

@iftex
@endgroup
@end iftex

Here is what the whole setup process looks like in GDB:

@iftex
@c A lot of these examples are too wide for regular @example.
@c This block is a dumb hack to make *this particular* @example use the regular
@c margins. See the definition of @cartouche to see how it works.
@begingroup
@let@nonarrowing=@comment
@end iftex

@example
@iftex
@hfuzz=1000pt
@end iftex
% mips-dec-ultrix4.5-gdb boot.exe
GNU gdb 4.17
Copyright 1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
GDB is free software, covered by the GNU General Public License, and you are
welcome to change it and/or distribute copies of it under certain conditions.
Type "show copying" to see the conditions.
There is absolutely no warranty for GDB.  Type "show warranty" for details.
This GDB was configured as "--host=i586-pc-linux-gnu --target=mips-dec-ultrix4.5"...
(gdb) target remote 127.0.0.1:33891
Remote debugging using 127.0.0.1:33891
__start () at setup.S:24
24              move $1, $0
Current language:  auto; currently asm
@end example

@iftex
@endgroup
@end iftex

@section GDB, VMIPS and Signals

Since VMIPS does not know what operating system you are running on it, and GDB
does not believe in hardware exceptions (only operating system signals), VMIPS
has its own mapping of hardware exceptions to signals.

The mapping is as follows: Each signal is followed by a list of the hardware
exceptions that map to it.

@table @var
@item SIGINT
@itemize
@item Interrupt
@end itemize

@item SIGSEGV
@itemize
@item TLB modification exception
@item TLB exception (load or instruction fetch)
@item TLB exception (store)
@item Address error exception (load or instruction fetch)
@item Address error exception (store)
@end itemize

@item SIGBUS
@itemize
@item Instruction bus error
@item Data (load or store) bus error
@end itemize

@item SIGTRAP
@itemize
@item SYSCALL exception
@item Breakpoint exception (BREAK instruction)
@item Processor reset (only at VMIPS startup)
@end itemize

@item SIGILL
@itemize
@item Reserved instruction exception
@end itemize

@item SIGFPE
@itemize
@item Coprocessor Unusable
@item Arithmetic Overflow
@end itemize

@item SIGHUP
@itemize
@item (Anything else.)
@end itemize
@end table

@subsection Startup behavior

Upon connecting to the VMIPS socket, gdb asks for the number of the
signal that stopped VMIPS. Of course, there was no exception, since no
instructions have executed, but we have to give a reason anyway. The
signal that is always returned is the signal corresponding to the
breakpoint exception -- hence the listing for processor reset in the
signal table above, even though reset is not really an ordinary exception.

@section ROM Breakpoints

@cindex ROM, breakpoints in
VMIPS supports the setting of breakpoints in ROM.  This would not be
extraordinary except that MIPS breakpoints are usually implemented by
GDB's remote serial protocol by overwriting instructions with MIPS @code{break}
instructions. VMIPS keeps a single bit for each word of ROM, in order
to tell whether that instruction is really a breakpoint. GDB keeps track
of setting and unsetting the breakpoints.

@section Limitations

@cindex debugging, limitations of

@subsection Detaching Limitations

When the debugger disconnects or detaches from VMIPS, the system will halt
and VMIPS will exit.

@subsection Protocol Limitations

The GDB remote serial protocol supports lots of packets, but VMIPS does
not support all of them.  The following subset of the GDB remote serial
protocol is implemented.

@itemize
@item packet 'g': Read registers
@item packet 'G': Write registers
@item packet 'm': Read memory
@item packet 'M': Write memory
@item packet 'c': Continue
@item packet 'D': Detach
@item packet 's': Single step
@item packet 'k': Kill target
@item packet 'H': Set thread
@item packet 'T': Poll thread
@item packet '?': What was the last signal?
@item packet 'Z': Set breakpoint
@item packet 'z': Remove breakpoint
@item packet 'q': Query
@end itemize

For some of these packets, not all the arguments are supported.
For example, in general, VMIPS acts as if it has exactly one thread.

@section Using Insight as a GUI for VMIPS

@cindex Insight
@cindex GUI, using Insight
You can use the Insight graphical front end for GDB as a graphical front end
for VMIPS. 

As with GDB, you must use a MIPS-targetted Insight to debug programs
running on VMIPS; that is, you must use a copy of Insight that
understands MIPS assembly language and registers.  Usually, a copy of
Insight configured this way will have a name starting with @file{mips},
e.g., @file{mipsel-ecoff-gdb}. (Confusingly, Insight binaries are also
named @file{gdb}.)

Now let's walk through an example scenario where we want to
use Insight to debug a program running in ROM on VMIPS.

1. Start VMIPS using the @option{-o debug} command line flag, to activate the
debugging interface, and specify the name of the ROM file containing the ROM
you want to debug.

2. Start Insight. 

3. Choose Open... from the File menu. Select the executable file corresponding
to the ROM file you just loaded in to VMIPS.

4. VMIPS will have printed out a message like:
@example
Use this command to attach debugger: target remote 127.0.0.1:3082
@end example

To tell Insight what to do, choose Target Settings... from the File menu.
In the Connection panel, set the Target to Remote/TCP, and set the Hostname to
127.0.0.1, and set the Port to 3082. Then hit OK.

5.  Now, choose Connect to target from the Run menu. This will probably
bring up a dialog box affirming that the connection was successful.
Now you can look at registers, step through code, and whatnot, till your
heart's content.

@node Interaction, Devices, Debugging, Top
@chapter Interaction

The interactive inspector (also known as the interactor) provides
a way to inspect a running vmips system without attaching a debugger.

You can enter the interactive inspector at any time while the 
simulation is running.
To enter the interactive inspector, hit Control-underscore (^_) which enters
an ASCII 0x1F (US) byte at the terminal. This will cause the
simulation to pause and the "vmips=>" interactor prompt to be
printed.

The interactor will loop prompting you for commands and processing
them until you enter a command that exits the interactor.

@section Command table

@table @samp
@item go
Continue execution and exit the interactive inspector.
You can reenter the interactive inspector again later by hitting
Control-underscore again.

@item step
Attempt to step one instruction.
After a single-step attempt, the PC will be printed.

@item halt
Halt machine, exit the interactive inspector, and quit VMIPS.

@item quit
Same as halt.

@item regs
Print the CPU registers.

@item cp0
Print the CP0 registers and TLB.

@item mem A
Print the first few words of memory starting from address A.  The address
provided must be a 32-bit, word-aligned address.

@item dis A
Disassemble the first few words of memory at address A.  The address
provided must be a 32-bit, word-aligned address.  Due to a limitation
in the current implementation, disassembly will invariably be printed
to standard error.

@item stack
Print the first few words of memory starting from the stack pointer.

@item help
Print a list of available commands.
@end table

@node Devices, Monitor, Interaction, Top
@chapter Devices

VMIPS comes with a few standard devices.

@section SPIM-compatible console device

The SPIM-compatible Console Device models a serial controller with
two 200-baud full-duplex communication lines and a 1 Hz clock providing
timer interrupts. This console device is currently the standard console
device used in VMIPS.

@subsection Memory-mapped registers

The SPIM-compatible console device communicates with the CPU by means
of a series of 9 32-bit-wide control and data registers, for a total
of 36 memory-mapped bytes. The control registers are used for enabling
and disabling specific devices' interrupt request mechanisms, and for
determining which device(s) is/are ready for data when polling or during
interrupt processing.

The following table details the offset of each register within the
console device's mapped memory:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.20 0.40
@item offset 0x00 @tab Keyboard 1 Control
@item offset 0x04 @tab Keyboard 1 Data
@item offset 0x08 @tab Display 1 Control
@item offset 0x0c @tab Display 1 Data
@item offset 0x10 @tab Keyboard 2 Control
@item offset 0x14 @tab Keyboard 2 Data
@item offset 0x18 @tab Display 2 Control
@item offset 0x1c @tab Display 2 Data
@item offset 0x20 @tab Clock Control 
@end multitable

Within each control register, Bit 2 of each word is the Device
Interrupt Enable bit, and bit 1 is the Device Ready bit.  Only the
Device Interrupt Enable bits of the control registers are writable;
other bits must be written as zero. Only Device Interrupt Enable and
Device Ready are readable; other bits read as zero. Initially the 
Interrupt Enable bits on all SPIM console control words are unset.

Within each data register, writes are allowed only to the
least-significant 8 bits; the other 24 bits read as zero and must be
written as zero.

@subsection Interrupts

With a SPIM-compatible Console Device configured, the following interrupt
lines are enabled.

@display
Interrupt line 2 (Cause bit 0x0400) is wired to the Clock
Interrupt line 3 (Cause bit 0x0800) is wired to the #1 Keyboard
Interrupt line 4 (Cause bit 0x1000) is wired to the #1 Display
Interrupt line 5 (Cause bit 0x2000) is wired to the #2 Keyboard
Interrupt line 6 (Cause bit 0x4000) is wired to the #2 Display
@end display

When any one of the console devices is both ready and has its Device
Interrupt Enable bit set, it requests an interrupt.  (You must have the
interrupt mask and interrupt enable bits of the CP0 Status register set
for this request to succeed.) It follows that if the device becomes ready
and then the user sets the Device Interrupt Enable bit, the device will
immediately attempt to request an interrupt.  You can determine which
device requested the interrupt by examining the Interrupt Pending field
of the CP0 Cause register in your interrupt handler code.

@subsection Display

The display data register is write-only.
On a write to the data register, the display becomes unready and writes
a char to the connected serial interface; it becomes ready again in 40
ms.

@subsection Clock

The Clock has no data register and becomes ready at most every second. A
read from the Clock Control register makes the clock unready. Writes to
the clock control register are as above.

@subsection Keyboard

The keyboard is initially unready; whenever the connected serial
interface has a byte waiting on input, and the keyboard is unready,
the keyboard reads the byte into its buffer, and becomes ready. If the
keyboard is ready for more than 40 ms., it will check the connected
serial interface again.  If there is another byte available, it will
read it and save it in the buffer, writing over the one which was
originally in the buffer. No provision is made for detection of these
buffer overruns.  Updates to the keyboard buffer happen at most once
per instruction fetched.

The keyboard data register is read-only.  On a read from the data
register, if the keyboard is ready it becomes unready and returns the
byte in its holding buffer. If the keyboard data register is read while
the keyboard is unready, the data in the buffer is the same as when
the keyboard was last ready.

@subsection Compatibility

The SPIM-compatible console device is based on the SPIMSAL 4.4.2 version,
which generally provides a superset of the functionality of the console
device provided in SPIM 5.x and 6.x.

In SPIM 5.x/6.x, the keyboard controller appears at virtual address
0xffff0000. Keyboard 2, Display 2 and the Clock device are not available.
(This is the same layout used in Patterson and Hennessy's Computer
Organization and Design textbook.)  Therefore, in order to get compatible
behavior from the VMIPS SPIM-compatible console device, your startup
code should configure the TLB to map virtual page number 0xffff0 to the
physical addresses where the SPIM-compatible console device is configured.

In SPIM, when you read or write to a memory-mapped I/O register, only the
virtual address and the data value stored are considered, not the width
of the access.  This means that on a big-endian machine, you can (for
example) write the display at the most-significant byte of the display
data word (using a store byte instruction), or at the least-significant
byte of the word (using a store word instruction). In VMIPS, you must
always write the least-significant byte.

In SPIMSAL, it is believed to be the case that reads always read from
keyboard 1, never from keyboard 2; whereas the user may write to either
display, but data written to either display are invariably written to
the simulator's standard output. Compatibility with these bugs is not
supported.

@subsection Disconnected operation

The SPIM console device can be configured to turn off either the first or
the second display/keyboard pair. Use the special keyword @option{off} in
place of a device name, e.g., @samp{-o ttydev=off}, to turn off a console
line. When a console line is turned off, it is described as `disconnected',
and behaves as follows:

@itemize
@item Interrupts can be turned on and off as usual. 
@item A disconnected keyboard always has Device Ready clear and always
returns ASCII NULs (zero bytes) when its data word is read.
@item A disconnected display discards bytes written to it, and always
has Device Ready set, but if its interrupts are turned on, it will not
generate an interrupt.
@end itemize

@section Standard clock device

This section documents the standard clock device for VMIPS. It is intended
to support user programs' access to real and simulated time.  The clock
device supports a hardware clock interrupt to notify MIPS programs of the
passage of a prespecified number of nanoseconds, determined by the user's
setting of the @option{clockintr} option. This clock provides a much
higher resolution than the SPIM-compatible console device's 1Hz clock.
The clock is enabled or disabled with the @option{clockdevice} option.

@subsection Memory-mapped registers

The standard clock device has 5 registers, configured to be mapped
into memory at physical address 0x01010000. The following table
defines the layout of the memory-mapped clock device registers:

@table @code
@item offset 0x00
real time, seconds

@item offset 0x04
real time, microseconds

@item offset 0x08
simulated time, seconds

@item offset 0x0c
simulated time, microseconds

@item offset 0x10
control word
@end table

Writing any of the clock's real time words is undefined. Writing a clock's
simulated time word sets that component of the simulated time if the number
written is a non-negative signed integer, otherwise there is no effect.

The control word has 32 bits. Bit 2 of the control word is the interrupt
enable bit (@code{CTL_IE} is defined as 0x00000002) and bit 1 is the device
ready bit (@code{CTL_RDY} is defined as 0x00000001). All other bits in the
control word are currently reserved and read as zero. Writing any of the
other bits of the control word is undefined. The interrupt enable bit
in the clock device control word is initially unset.

@subsection Interrupts

The standard clock device is connected to the hardware interrupt
line specified by the @option{clockdeviceirq} option, which must be a
number corresponding to an interrupt line reserved for use by hardware
(2 through 7). See the ``Summary of configuration options'' section of
the ``Customizing'' chapter for more information.  The clock requests an
interrupt whenever the clock is in the ready state and the interrupt
enable bit on the control word is set.

The @option{clockintr} option gives the frequency of clock interrupts in
nanoseconds of simulated time. See the ``Summary of configuration options''
section of the ``Customizing'' chapter for more information.

@subsection Real vs. simulated time

Real time is obtained from the host's @code{gettimeofday(2)} system
call, so it should be close to the host's view of the current time. No
sophisticated algorithms are used to calibrate the real time clock, so
it will drift a little.

The speed of simulated time is determined by the @option{realtime},
@option{timeratio}, and @option{clockintr} options. See the ``Summary
of configuration options'' section of the ``Customizing'' chapter for more
information. Increasing the speed of simulated time will most likely
make the simulation run more slowly because it will increase the average
number of system calls per instruction.

@section Halt device

This section documents the halt device. It is provided so that simulated
operating systems can stop the simulator in a controlled manner, without
having to rely on specific instructions or exceptional conditions. The
halt device is enabled or disabled with the @option{haltdevice} option.

@subsection Memory-mapped registers

The halt device has 1 register, configured to be mapped into memory at
physical address 0x01010024. The following table defines the layout of the
memory-mapped halt device register:

@table @code
@item offset 0x00
control word

@end table

Writing a non-zero value to the halt device control word halts the
simulation. Writing zero has no effect. The control word is always read
as zero.

@section DECstation 5000/200-compatible devices

VMIPS contains partial support for the built-in memory-mapped devices on the
motherboard of the Digital Equipment DECstation 5000/200.  This support should
be considered "beta" quality in this release.   All the DECstation-compatible
devices are disabled by default; see the options starting with @option{dec} in
the Customizing chapter for information about how to turn them on.

The following devices are supported:

@itemize
@item DECstation 5000/200's Dallas Semiconductor DS1287-based real-time
clock (RTC) chip (use @option{-o decrtc} to enable; mapped into memory
at physical address 0x1fe80000)

@item DECstation 5000/200's Control/Status register (use @option{-o
deccsr} to enable; mapped into memory at physical address 0x1ff00000)

@item DECstation 5000/200's Check Syndrome (CHKSYN) and Error Address
(ERRADR) registers (use @option{-o decstat} to enable; mapped into memory
at physical addresses 0x1fd00000 and 0x1fd80000 respectively)

@item DECstation 5000/200's DZ11-based serial chip (use @option{-o
decserial} to enable; mapped into memory at physical address 0x1fe00000; note:
interrupt-driven I/O does not work well with this device -- use polling
instead)
@end itemize

In the future, we plan to finish these device emulations, test them more
thoroughly, and document them more completely in this manual.

The devices are documented thoroughly in the document: "DECstation 5000/200
KN02 System Module Functional Specification", published August 1990 by Digital
Equipment Corporation. You may be able to find it by doing a web search.

@node Monitor, Extending, Devices, Top
@chapter Monitor

@cindex bootstrap monitor
@cindex bootstrap loader
@cindex ROM bootstrap loader
@cindex ROM monitor

The main use of the ROM monitor is to load executables into RAM
and run them.  Currently, only COFF executables are supported.

@section Monitor Commands

The ROM monitor is structured around a simple command processor
that prompts the user to enter a command, reads a command from
the first serial line, and executes it. This loop continues until you
boot a kernel (which may or may not ever return control to the monitor)
or halt the system.

The following are commands supported by the ROM monitor.
The first word is the command name; other words are arguments that you
specify.  Arguments in brackets are optional.

@table @code
@item rx
Receive file via XModem protocol over serial device into RAM.

@item quit
Halt the boot monitor.

@item help
Print a brief list of commands.

@item peek addr nwords
Read and print 32-bit value at address addr.

@item poke addr value
Write the given 32-bit value to address addr.

@item info
Print information about a COFF program which was previously loaded.

@item boot [args]
Run a program which has previously been loaded by calling its entrypoint.

@item rom addr nwords
Prepare to boot a file from ROM address addr, having length nwords (rather than
RAM).

@item printenv
Print the boot environment.

@item setenv varname value
Set the boot environment variable named varname to value.

@item unsetenv varname
Delete the boot environment variable named varname.

@item call addr [args]
Call procedure at addr.

@end table

@section Loading Your Program

The main facility provided for transferring a file to the boot monitor is
the XModem serial file transfer protocol.  On the host side, you can use
a program such as @command{sx} to send files via XModem.

COFF executable files are loaded to @code{BASE_ADDR} (0x80000000 by default),
and then moved to their proper location at boot time.

Instead of transferring a file to the boot monitor, you can put the file
into a separate area of ROM and load it using the @command{rom} command.

Yet another alternative is to use the @command{catrom} script, which will
build you a ROM image containing the boot monitor and a COFF executable
of your choice, and patch the boot monitor to load it automatically.
A boot monitor thus patched will not require user interaction and is very
often the quickest way to test out a new program. A dummy @code{argv[0]}
will always be passed to the booted program in this mode.

@section Booting Your Loaded Program

For the boot and call commands, the code being called is assumed to have
the same prototype as main. Providing arguments is optional.  Any arguments
provided are passed to the procedure in argc/argv form. It is a good idea
always to pass at least one argument (@code{argv[0]}) to the booted program.

The boot-time exception vectors (BEV bit in CP0 Status register) will
typically be disabled upon booting a program and reenabled if that program
returns control to the monitor.

@section Other Monitor Facilities

The boot monitor contains a set of basic library routines and a
jump table that mimics to some extent the one found in the DECstation
ROM.

Exceptions caught in the boot monitor will generally cause the
monitor to print a message and halt.

@section Hacking the Monitor

Whether to use the SPIM-compatible console device or the DECstation-compatible
serial device is determined at the time you build the boot monitor. Either
the @code{SPIM_CONSOLE} or the @code{DZ_CONSOLE} macro at the top of
@file{serial.c} must be set to 1.

The monitor directory contains a @file{README} file with more information
about the structure of the code.

If you are trying to get standalone programs working before you have a
working C library or proper serial drivers, you may get some mileage out
of the standalone library (@file{lib.c} and @file{lib.h}) routines used by
the boot monitor.

The boot monitor directory also contains some tests, and an example
(@file{loadtest.c}) program that you may be able to compile and boot via
the monitor.  Of course, the monitor code is under the same license as VMIPS.

@node Extending, Test Suite, Monitor, Top
@chapter Extending

This chapter is intended to be a hacker's guide to adding or modifying
VMIPS functionality.

@section Road map to the VMIPS source code

This section is intended to help interested persons find various things
in the VMIPS source code, and get a general idea of how the various
software modules are structured.

The processing of command-line options and of options in your
@file{.vmipsrc} is directed by routines in @file{options.cc} and in class
@code{Options}. The default options and the option documentation are found
in @file{optiontbl.h}.

The memory mapping unit has a high-level interface to the rest of
the code, which is defined in @file{mapper.cc} and @file{mapper.h},
and in class @code{Mapper}.  The memory mapping unit uses a bunch of
low-level data structures, which are defined in @file{range.cc} and
@file{range.h}, in class @code{Range}. This is
meant to be logically and physically separate from the TLB, which is
implemented as part of the system control coprocessor.  The actual chunks
of host virtual memory which are used for the virtual machine's physical
memory are encapsulated in class @code{MemoryModule}, which is implemented in
@file{memorymodule.h}.

The memory mapping unit is responsible for handling memory accesses
via the cache, or without using the cache, as appropriate. The cache
is defined in class @code{Cache}, also in @file{mapper.cc} and
@file{mapper.h}. Two instances of this class exist as the @code{icache}
and @code{dcache} members of class @code{Mapper}.

The system control coprocessor (MIPS coprocessor zero) and the
TLB are implemented in @file{cpzero.cc} and @file{cpzero.h}, as
class @code{CPZero}. The structure of TLB entries is defined in
@file{tlbentry.h}, and constants related to the
register set of MIPS coprocessor zero are defined in @file{cpzeroreg.h}.

The CPU (class @code{CPU}) and the default exception handling behavior are
implemented in @file{cpu.cc} and @file{cpu.h}. Exception handling behavior
is an interface described by class DeviceExc (in @file{deviceexc.h});
this class provides for the @code{exception} instance method and its
implementations in class @code{CPU} and class @code{Debug}.
Constants for the different kinds of exceptions which are implemented
by MIPS processors are defined in @file{excnames.h}.

The disassembler uses code from GNU libopcodes (part of GNU
Binutils); it is located in the @file{libopcodes_mips} directory.
The high-level C++ interface to the disassembler is in @file{stub-dis.cc}.

The GNU debugger interface is separated into a high-level part (which
deals with the various debugger requests) in @file{debug.cc} and
@file{debug.h}, and a low-level part (which assembles and disassembles
the GDB remote serial protocol packets), in @file{remotegdb.cc} and
@file{remotegdb.h}.

A few parts of the VMIPS system have a central procedure which needs
to be run periodically in a loop in order to update the part of the
simulation that they are responsible for.  These parts typically have
instance methods named @code{step()}. The @code{CPU} class, for example,
fetches, decodes, and executes one instruction each time its @code{step()}
function is called.

The @code{vmips} class, implemented in @file{vmips.cc}, is used to tie
all the components of the system together.  This class, and specifically
its @code{run()} member function, is responsible for setting up
and configuring all system components and calling the @code{step()}
member function(s).  The vmips class is not a very smart or
flexible configuration mechanism; it eventually ought to be replaced with
a configuration language of some sort.

The simulator's idea of time is managed by classes in @file{clock.cc} and
@file{clock.h}. VMIPS programs gain access to the simulated clock by using
the memory-mapped clock device, which is implemented in files
@file{clockdev.cc} and @file{clockdev.h}, and whose register map is available
in @file{clockreg.h}. The clock manages tasks, which are basically function
objects that can be cancelled or fire at a later time. Tasks are defined in
@file{task.h}. 

VMIPS provides standard error-reporting functions, which your code can use.
They are defined in @file{error.cc} and @file{error.h}.

Some of VMIPS's simulated devices share common semantics for control
register bits, constants for which are defined in @file{devreg.h}.

VMIPS provides a halt device, which can halt the machine even when the
options such as @file{haltbreak} are turned off.  It is implemented in
@file{haltdev.cc} and @file{haltdev.h}, and its register map is defined
in @file{haltreg.h}.

The SPIM-compatible console device (implemented in @file{spimconsole.cc}
and @file{spimconsole.h}, with a register map in @file{spimconsreg.h})
is based on a generic terminal controller, which is implemented in
@file{terminalcontroller.cc} and @file{terminalcontroller.h}.

The various DECstation-compatible devices are implemented in the files whose
names start with @file{dec}.

@cindex ROM monitor
The ROM monitor code is in the directory @file{sample_code/xmboot}.
See the Monitor chapter for more details.

The manual, and any random bits of hacking information which have not
yet been incorporated into the manual, are in the directory @file{doc}.

The VMIPS automated regression test suite is in the directory
@file{test_code}. Some interesting sample code, including the canned ROM
setup code used to build ROM files out of C programs for the test suite,
is in the directory @file{sample_code}.

Various scripts used by the maintainers to help maintain the code are
in the directory @file{utils}.

VMIPS provides a simple front-end to GNU MIPS cross-compilation tools,
called Vmipstool. Its implementation is in the file @file{vmipstool.cc};
it shares a little bit of options- and error-handling code with VMIPS.

Interfaces to the host system's C++ standard library are included in
@file{sysinclude.h}. @file{wipe.h} is a template utility function used
for deleting all the objects contained in standard C++ containers.

Please read the rest of this chapter for information about the rest
of the files in the VMIPS source directory.

@section Endianness issues

When you are making extensions to VMIPS, it is important not to assume that
your host processor is little-endian (or to assume that it is big-endian). One
of the first things that VMIPS does when it starts is to determine the
endianness of the host processor. The endianness of the VMIPS target processor
is determined by the @option{bigendian} command-line option. Your extension
can query the @code{machine->host_bigendian} flag to determine whether the
host processor is big-endian or not, and it can query the @option{bigendian}
command-line option, via the public interface of class @code{Options},
to determine whether the VMIPS target processor is big-endian or not.

The physical memory system (class @code{Mapper}) defines some convenience
methods which you can use. You can call the @code{swap_word()} or
@code{swap_halfword()} methods of class @code{Mapper}, or the wrapper functions
@code{host_to_mips_word()} and @code{mips_to_host_word()}, to do endianness
translation between the host machine and target machine, when necessary.

When you define memory-mapped devices, you should return data to
the Mapper in host endianness. It is recommended that memory-mapped devices
also store their data in host endianness, unless there is a good reason.

@section Memory-Mapped Devices

Memory-mapped devices must inherit from class @code{DeviceMap}, which
is defined in the files @file{devicemap.cc} and @file{devicemap.h}
in the VMIPS source directory.

Memory-mapped devices must have a constructor and a destructor. The
constructor must call the DeviceMap constructor with a single parameter,
called @var{extent}. It should be equal to the number of
bytes which are mapped into the processor's memory; this figure must be
a multiple of 4. The device must also override the following abstract
methods:

@example
uint32 fetch_word(uint32 offset, int mode, DeviceExc *client);
uint32 store_word(uint32 offset, uint32 data, DeviceExc *client);
@end example

The meanings of the parameters are as follows:

@table @var
@item offset
Byte offset from the beginning of the device's memory-mapped region that is
being read or written. The width of the read (fetch) or write (store)
is either a word (4 bytes), halfword (2 bytes), or a single byte,
depending on the call. Since this value is a byte offset, if you want to
figure out which word of your device is being accessed, you should
divide it by 4.

@item mode
This tells you whether the memory access is a data load
(@code{DATALOAD}), data store (@code{DATASTORE}), or instruction
fetch (@code{INSTFETCH}). These constants are defined in
@file{accesstypes.h}. For narrow (< 1 word) fetches, the mode is always
@code{DATALOAD}. For stores, the mode is always @code{DATASTORE}.
The only case in which this is ambiguous is for the @code{fetch_word}
case, where mode may be either @code{DATALOAD} or @code{INSTFETCH}.
Most devices do not need to bother with the mode, except when there is an
illegal access. See the section on exception behavior, below.

@item client
Every memory access is requested by a client, which is responsible for
handling any exceptions which may arise. Any component of the VMIPS
system which may access memory must either inherit from class @code{DeviceExc}
(i.e., ``a device which may handle exceptions''), or have a pointer to a device
which does. See the section on exception behavior, below.

@item data
When the client is storing a value, you will receive the value as the
@var{data} parameter.
@end table

@section Exception behavior

Whenever there is an exception,
the device must make the call
@example
client->exception(type, mode);
@end example
whose precise prototype is defined in @file{deviceexc.h}.

@var{Type} must be one of the standard MIPS exception codes, which are
defined in @file{cpzeroreg.h}, and elsewhere in this manual. @var{Mode}
is the mode of the memory access; see the table entry for @var{mode}
above.

Please note that you should not call the @code{exception} method in
order to generate a hardware interrupt (i.e., the Interrupt exception).
Interrupts are managed by class @code{IntCtrl}, and your device should
call the @code{assertInt} function to generate them.  See the
``Interrupt-generating devices'' section for more details on what you
should do. If you are curious about the inner workings of the interrupt
controller, you can read its source in @file{intctrl.cc} and @file{intctrl.h}.

@subsection Coprocessors

If your device is part of a MIPS coprocessor, you should pass a third
argument to the @code{client->exception()} call, which is the number of
the coprocessor; it may meaningfully be 0, 1, 2, or 3. Ordinarily, that
is to say in situations not involving coprocessors, this parameter
defaults to -1 and does not need to be specified explicitly.

@cindex coprocessor zero
Coprocessor 0 is the MIPS system control coprocessor, responsible for
TLB and paging management. It is implemented as class @code{CPZero} in
@file{cpzero.cc} and @file{cpzero.h}. It has 16 registers, each of which
has some read-only bits and some read/write bits. Extension code should
not attempt to misrepresent itself as being coprocessor zero without a
good reason.

@cindex registers, read-only
One of the jobs of the @code{CPZero} class is to ensure that attempts to
write to these registers are only allowed to write to the bits which
are writable, so if you are interested in implementing read-only and
read/write registers in your virtual hardware, look through @file{cpzero.cc}
for @var{read_masks} and @var{write_masks}.

@cindex coprocessors, floating-point
Coprocessor 1 is the floating point coprocessor, but it is not
implemented. It may, however, be implemented in the future. Volunteers
to begin such a task would be more than welcome.

@cindex coprocessors, default behavior
The default behavior of MIPS coprocessors 1, 2, and 3 in the VMIPS system
is to assume that they are not connected to the system and that accesses
to them should therefore trigger the @code{CpU} (Coprocessor Unusable)
exception.

@section Mapping memory-mapped devices

You can map each memory-mapped device at a single physical address in the
machine's memory.  The instantiation process is as follows: Assume
that @code{TestDev} is a memory-mapped device class which derives from
class @code{DeviceMap}, that @var{testdev} is an instance of class
@code{TestDev}, and that @var{physmem} is a @code{Mapper} (memory
manager) object.
 
@example
 	/* Test device at base phys addr 0x01000000 */
 	testdev = new TestDev();
 	physmem->add_device_mapping(testdev, 0x01000000);
@end example

@cindex memory-mapped devices, configuring
@cindex memory-mapped devices, specifying addresses for
A device should have a single base address;
you should have a single call to the Mapper instance
method @code{add_device_mapping(device, addr)} to set it.
@var{device} is an instance of a class deriving from class
@code{DeviceMap}. @var{addr} is the physical address where you want the
device to appear in memory.

This code is generally executed as part of the @code{vmips->run()}
method in @file{vmips.cc}. Look there for more information and some
examples of what to do.

@section Interrupt-generating devices

@cindex interrupts
VMIPS provides support for virtual devices that generate hardware
interrupts to communicate with the processor. These virtual devices should
inherit from class @code{DeviceInt} (defined in @file{deviceint.h}). This
section outlines some information about how to write such virtual devices.

@subsection Connecting devices to the interrupt controller

@cindex interrupts, request lines for
There are 8 interrupt lines in the R3000/R3000A, 6 of which (7..2) are
hardware interrupts (readable by software), and the other 2 of which
(1..0) are software interrupts (readable/writable by software).

The class @code{IntCtrl} instance method @code{connectLine(irq,
device)} is used in @file{vmips.cc} to notify the interrupt
controller and the device that the interrupt line specified by @var{irq}
is connected to @var{device}.  @var{irq} must be one of the hardware
interrupt constants defined in @file{deviceint.h} and @var{device}
must be an object of a class deriving from @code{DeviceInt}.

@subsection Generating and cancelling interrupt requests

@cindex interrupts, generating requests for
The class @code{DeviceInt} instance method @code{assertInt(irq)} is used
to request an interrupt from the processor.  Your device should only
request interrupts that have previously been connected to it using the
interrupt controller (see above). Your device may share an interrupt
request line with another device.  In practical terms, asserting an
interrupt request line will cause a trap to the general exception vector
before the next instruction.  If your device asserts an interrupt,
it stays asserted until it is explicitly de-asserted.

@cindex interrupts, cancelling requests for
The instance method @code{deassertInt(irq)} will turn off
the interrupt request for your device; this should be done when the
condition that caused the device to request an interrupt has become
satisfied. Note that this does not necessarily imply that the interrupt
request for the processor will be turned off, as there may be another
device trying to use that interrupt request line.

For both calls, the IRQ parameter must be one of the hardware interrupt
constants defined in @file{deviceint.h}.  It is not a good idea to use the
general @code{exception()} method to cause interrupt exceptions, because this
could cause excess interrupts to be generated.

The place where you should make these calls and do these checks is when
your device's code is called through the @code{periodic()}
callback. Your device will get @code{periodic()} calls fairly often.

@subsection Software interrupts vs. hardware interrupts

@cindex interrupts, reserved for software
Two of the interrupt lines (IRQ 0 and 1) are reserved for software
use. Only the interrupts which are not reserved for software use (IRQ
2 through 7) may be triggered by VMIPS devices.

@subsection Turning interrupts off and on

@cindex interrupts, enabling and disabling
There is a global Interrupt Enable bit for the whole system; this is the
IEc (Interrupt Enable (current)) bit, bit 0 (mask 0x001) of the Status
register (coprocessor zero register 12).  If this bit is turned off,
no interrupt will be triggered. Be sure to turn on your Interrupt Enable
and Interrupt Mask (below) bits when you are testing your new
interrupt-generating device.

@cindex interrupts, masking
Additionally, bits 15 - 8 (mask 0x0ff00) of the Status register are
individual Interrupt Mask bits. Each bit represents a global interrupt
enable/disable bit for the entire system per interrupt-request line. For
example, if you turn off bit 10 of this register (mask 0x0400), the IRQ2
line will be disabled for the whole system.

Finally, it is not uncommon for individual devices to have their own
interrupt enable/disable bits that you can set or clear. See the
documentation for each individual device for more information.

@section Error reporting

When your code needs to emit warning or error messages, we recommend
you use the following functions from @file{error.cc}:

@example
	void error(const char *msg, ...) throw();
	void fatal_error(const char *msg, ...) throw();
	void warning(const char *msg, ...) throw();
@end example

@code{fatal_error} will result in a call to abort() after printing the 
error message.  All of these functions will print a newline after MSG.

@section Weird things

@subsection Branch on Coprocessor Zero True/False
@cindex coprocessor zero, branch instructions
@cindex system control coprocessor, branch instructions
These instructions are not supposed to cause reserved instruction
exceptions, even though the behavior of BC0F and BC0T instructions on
MIPS-1 machines is not specified in most canonical references.

On some DEC MIPS machines, the coprocessor 0 condition bit (which BC0F
and BC0T test) is wired to the external write-buffer-empty bit; that is,
when all stores have completed, the write buffer becomes empty, and the
bit goes to true. This makes it possible for a hacker to write the line
@samp{1: bc0f 1b} and thereby loop until the write buffer is empty.  However,
this is not true of all DECstations, or of the Sony NEWS 3400.

The coprocessor zero condition bit has an entirely different use on the
R4400 and compatible processors; it is used to tell when you got a cache
hit with a CACHE operation. The R10000 also implements this condition,
but the bit is not wired to the coprocessor zero condition.

Since VMIPS does not support CACHE operations, and does not have a write
buffer, VMIPS emulates the case where the CpCond bit for CP0 is always
TRUE, i.e., applications that look for the writebuffer will find that
it is always empty.

@node Test Suite, Installation, Extending, Top
@chapter Test Suite

VMIPS has a test suite with a small number of regression tests.  It uses the
DejaGNU test framework, which is written in the Expect language.  Expect was
written by Don Libes, and is a dialect of Tcl, the Tool Command Language by
Ousterhout et al.

@section How to run the test suite

In order to run the test suite or add tests to it, you will need to have
Expect and DejaGNU installed.  Any version of DejaGNU later than 1.3 should
work fine. We have mostly used Expect version 5.32 or later; older versions
may have bugs that may lead to unexpected test failures.

The next step is to configure and build VMIPS from source. This is important,
because currently, you can only run tests on a freshly built copy of VMIPS; no
provision exists for testing a previously installed copy of VMIPS.  Simply run
@samp{./configure} and @samp{make} from the top level source directory to
build VMIPS. See the ``Installation'' section of the manual for more details.

To run the test suite, run @samp{make check} from the top level source
directory.  This will invoke the DejaGNU @command{runtest} command.
It will take a minute or so, and then you will get a count of tests that
passed and failed.  If you want to see a more comprehensive listing from
@command{runtest}, pass it the appropriate options through the Makefile,
by typing, for example: @samp{make RUNTESTFLAGS=--verbose check}.

You can also run the test suite by changing into the @file{test_code}
directory in the source tree and running @samp{runtest --tool vmips}.

As a general rule, no tests should fail in a released version of VMIPS;
however, CVS builds may have test failures from time to time.

@section Test suite frameworks

VMIPS has two comprehensive testing frameworks: the @file{regcheck}
framework, whose tests live in the @file{vmips.regcheck} directory, and the
@file{outcheck} framework, whose tests live in the @file{vmips.outcheck}
directory. The former looks at the final values of registers after a test
case is run, and the latter looks at the output that VMIPS prints out when
a test case is run.

Each of these main testing frameworks has its own @file{.exp} file that runs it.
You can easily run the subset of the test suite controlled by a given
@file{.exp} file, by passing its name on the @command{runtest} command line.
For example, if you want to run all the @file{regcheck} tests, you would type:
@samp{runtest --tool vmips regcheck.exp}.

There are a few test cases that do not use either of these frameworks,
because they have special requirements of some kind or are otherwise
unique in some inconvenient way. These test cases have their own Expect
drivers (@file{.exp} files) and live in the @file{vmips.misc-tests}
directory.

In addition, each test case is defined by a @file{.par} file that contains the
parameters of the test.  If you only want to run a single test from among the
@file{regcheck} tests, specify its @file{.par} file after an equal sign. For
example, you might type: @samp{runtest --tool vmips regcheck.exp=mumble.par}
to run only the @file{mumble.par} @file{regcheck} test.

@section How to add a test to the test suite

To write a new test case, first decide whether it is easier to have your test
case print out something or to look at the @option{haltdumpcpu} option's output
to verify it. This will tell you whether it should be an @file{outcheck} test
(if it prints out something) or a @file{regcheck} case (if you look at the
register values).  Then write up a @file{.par} file for the test case ---
the best way to learn how to do this, for the time being, is to examine the
examples in the @file{test_code} directory. Then move the @file{.par} file
and the test code (assembly or C) to the appropriate subdirectory for the
framework you chose, @file{vmips.regcheck} or @file{vmips.outcheck}. Now
you can try to make sure that it passes (or fails, as the case may be),
by running @samp{runtest --tool vmips} on it.

Also, note that you shouldn't add another test to @file{vmips.misc-tests}
unless you can't find a way to fit it into any of the existing testing
frameworks. Adding a test to @file{vmips.misc-tests} is tricky -- you may be
able to make progress by looking at the other @file{.exp} files in that
directory.

@section Common problems

You can get screenfuls of @samp{endian_option was not set} errors if you run
@command{runtest} without first making a DejaGNU @file{site.exp} configuration
file first.  To make a @file{site.exp} file, just run @samp{make site.exp}
in the @file{test_code} directory.

@section Additional test cases needed

Test cases should probably be added for the following categories of VMIPS
behaviors. (This list is from 2002; it is probably a good start, but it
may be out of date in the sense that it is unlikely to be exhaustive.)

@itemize
@item Vmipstool.
@item The debugger interface.
@item Exceptions: exception prioritizing, non-boot-time exception vectors,
all the TLB exceptions, Unimplemented Coprocessor exceptions, Reserved
Instruction exceptions, and exceptions due to PC address translation.
@item Check that the TLB does the right thing when you have a dirty entry
vs. a non-dirty one.
@item dumpcpu, dumpcp0, haltdumpcp0, bootmsg options.
@item tilde_expand() where it's not your own home directory.
@item Address translations in KSEG0 or KSEG2 or KUSEG or User mode.
@end itemize

@node Installation, Reporting Bugs, Test Suite, Top
@appendix Installation

VMIPS uses the GNU Autoconf/Automake system for configuration management.
This provides the familiar @command{configure} shell script interface for
setting configuration variables before compiling VMIPS. This means that the
traditional @samp{./configure; make; make install} sequence should work.
For more information about the special options that VMIPS @command{configure}
accepts, read on, or give the @option{--help} option to @command{configure}
for an abridged version.

@section Prerequisites

The VMIPS build process assumes that you have a C++ compiler installed
on the host machine. Any reasonably recent, ISO C++-compliant compiler
with working template function handling should work.  Some ancient
compilers, such as the system compiler on Red Hat Linux 6.x systems,
will not work. @command{configure} contains checks for a few known compiler
problems which will prevent VMIPS from working, and will print an error
message if it detects such a problem.

@cindex sample code, building
If you want to build any of the sample code which is included with the
VMIPS source distribution, you must have a full set of GNU MIPS cross
compilation tools installed when you configure VMIPS.  You will need to
tell @command{configure} the configuration prefix you used to install
the MIPS tools, by specifying it as the value to the @option{--with-mips}
argument. For example, if your MIPS cross compiler is
@file{/opt/mipsTools/bin/mips-dec-ultrix4.3-gcc}, then you should specify
@option{--with-mips=/opt/mipsTools} on the @command{configure} command
line. Additionally, you will also need to tell @command{configure} the
target you used to configure the MIPS cross tools, by specifying it as the
value to the @option{--target} argument (see below).  For a concise summary
of how to build the necessary MIPS cross tools, read ``Building MIPS Cross
Tools'', below.

@cindex test suite, running
If you want to run the test suite, you must additionally have Expect and
DejaGNU installed (any version published since 2000 should be fine). Once
VMIPS is compiled, you can type @samp{make check} to run the test suite.

@section Building from CVS

@cindex configure, missing
@cindex configure, creating
If you retrieved your sources from the CVS repository, you will need
Automake version 1.11.1 or later, Autoconf version 2.68 or later, and libtool
2.2.10 or later.  You will need perl 5 to build the documentation.
Your distribution will be missing many important files, including
@command{configure}. To generate these, run @command{utils/bootstrap}. To
automatically run configure once it has been generated, you can run
@samp{utils/bootstrap -c CONFIGURE-ARGS}.

@section Options that configure supports

If you want to build VMIPS with particular compiler optimizations or
with debug symbols, see the example in @file{INSTALL} describing how you
can set @var{CFLAGS}. You will want to do the same for @var{CXXFLAGS}.
By default, if your system compiler is GNU gcc, VMIPS will be built using 
@option{-g -O2}.

@pindex configure
@cindex configure, options supported by
Some of the interesting options that @samp{configure} supports are as
follows:

@table @option
@item --target=T
Specify the target used to configure your MIPS cross tools. @samp{T} must
match the value of the @option{--target} option provided to GNU Binutils
@command{configure}. 

@item --with-mips=MDIR
Specify installation prefix of MIPS cross tools (default MDIR = /opt/mips).
If you do not have MIPS cross tools, the VMIPS test suite will not be
available and sample code will not be built. If you want @command{configure}
to ignore your MIPS cross tools, you can indicate this by specifying
@samp{--without-mips}. 

This flag is used to set the default value of the vmipsrc
@option{mipstoolprefix} option. You can always edit the @option{mipstoolprefix}
option setting in @file{/etc/vmipsrc} after installation if you want to
change its value.

@item --with-mips-bin=DIR
Specify path to MIPS cross tools' executables (default MDIR/bin). This option
may be useful as an override if --with-mips isn't working for you, but beware
--- it is rarely tested by the developers.

@item --with-mips-endianness=VAL
Specify the default endianness of the VMIPS simulated machine, which must match
the MIPS cross tools target's endianness.  VAL may be specified as @code{big}
or @code{little}.  If you have installed MIPS cross tools, it is best to let
configure guess this (which it will do by running @samp{mips-objdump -i}),
unless you have reason to believe it is guessing wrong, because if you get
it wrong, vmipstool may compile ROMs that do not run correctly under vmips.
If you are configuring without MIPS cross tools installed, this will default
to little-endian.

This flag is used to set the default value of the vmipsrc @option{bigendian}
option. You can always edit the @option{bigendian} option setting in
@file{/etc/vmipsrc} after installation if you want to change this value.

@item --enable-profiling
Include (default=do not include) profiling instrumentation in the VMIPS
binary. This is only interesting if you are maintaining VMIPS and trying
to figure out why it is running more slowly than it should be. When we
last tried it, this option didn't seem to work very well on Mac OS X.

@end table

@section Post-Installation Setup

If you are an end-user with a binary package for VMIPS and a MIPS cross
compiler, you will probably want to make Vmipstool use the cross compiler
when you run commands such as @command{vmipstool --compile}.

You should edit your @file{/etc/vmipsrc} or @file{~/.vmipsrc} file and change
the @option{bigendian} and @option{mipstoolprefix} options to correspond
to the installed MIPS cross tools. (See the `Customizing' chapter for more
information on the syntax of these options.) Then, test it by trying to compile
a C file by running @command{vmipstool --compile -c foo.c}. You should get
an object file (@file{foo.o}) of the right endianness and object format;
you can check this using the @command{file} command on most Unix systems.

@section Packaging VMIPS

If you are a system integrator or distributor who is building a package
for VMIPS intended for distribution, you may be able to start by looking at
the RPM vmips.spec file or the Debian dpkg packaging files included in the
source distribution.

Your VMIPS package need not require a set of MIPS cross tools either at the
build or install stage.  Starting with VMIPS 1.2, it is perfectly possible
to build VMIPS without a cross-compiler, cross-assembler, or cross-linker.
Vmipstool will not be very useful without cross-tools, but it will build;
however, an end-user can install cross-tools and edit the system-wide
@file{vmipsrc} file to make the @option{mipstoolprefix} option value contain
their location.

The VMIPS binary package should probably include the following files:
@itemize
@item the two executables @command{vmips} and @command{vmipstool}
@item the two man pages @file{vmips.1} and @file{vmipstool.1}
@item the VMIPS Programmer's Manual in some format (for example, the Info file
@file{vmips.info}) 
@item the default GNU linker script used by vmipstool, @file{ld.script}
@item the system-wide configuration file @file{/etc/vmipsrc}
@item the assembler convenience header file @file{asm_regnames.h}
@end itemize

Help keep VMIPS free! As VMIPS is released under the GNU General Public
License, please make an effort to distribute sources (or at least, post a
link to the sources) if you distribute binaries or binary packages. Thanks!

@section Building MIPS Cross Tools

First decide on an installation prefix. The following examples will
use the prefix @samp{/opt/mips}, as above, which is the default place that
the VMIPS @command{configure} script looks for them; you can however use any
prefix you wish.

@cindex GNU Binutils, obtaining
Download a copy of Binutils, from any GNU mirror, or from the URL:
@display
@url{ftp://sources.redhat.com/pub/binutils/releases}
@end display
The most recently-tested version is 2.20.1.

Build binutils by running the following commands.  We recommend
@code{--disable-nls} because some versions do not build correctly with
NLS (linking against @file{libopcodes.a} results in unresolved symbols.)

@example
./configure --target=mipsel-ecoff --prefix=/opt/mips \
 --disable-nls --disable-shared
make
make install install-info
@end example

@pindex gcc
@cindex GNU Compiler Collection, obtaining
Download a copy of the GNU Compiler Collection (@command{gcc}) from
any GNU mirror, or from the URL:
@display
@url{ftp://gcc.gnu.org/pub/gcc/releases}
@end display

Our examples assume that you want to use the ECOFF binary format,
so we recommend you get gcc version 3.0.4.  If you would prefer to
use the ELF binary format, pretty much any recent version of gcc
will work, but note that you will need to pass @code{--target=mips-elf}
instead of @code{--target=mipsel-ecoff} when configuring both
binutils and gcc. We have most recently tested version 4.2.4 with
the ELF format.

@cindex GNU Compiler Collection, installing
You can read the documentation for building the compiler by pointing
your World-Wide Web browser at @url{http://gcc.gnu.org/install}.
When you encounter difficulties, you should consider consulting the
documentation for building the compiler, because it is more complete
than the following summary.

@enumerate
@item Unpack the sources. Let's say you unpack them in @file{/usr/build},
creating the directory @file{/usr/build/gcc-3.0.4}.

@item Create the build directory @file{/usr/build/gcc-mips-build}.

@cindex GNU Compiler Collection, configuring
@item First, add the directory @file{/opt/mips/bin} (where you just installed
Binutils) to your path, so that the compiler configuration process can
find your MIPS-targetted assembler and linker.

@item Configure the compiler. Change to the directory
@file{/usr/build/gcc-mips-build} and issue the following command. (The
back-slash characters represent the usual Unix shell convention of continuing
a command on the following line, and are inserted for typesetting purposes.)

@example
../gcc-3.0.4/configure --target=mipsel-ecoff \
 --prefix=/opt/mips --with-gnu-as --with-gnu-ld \
 --disable-threads --disable-nls --disable-shared \
 --enable-languages=c
@end example

@item If the configuration step fails, make sure you have a working native
compiler, and/or try a different version of gcc. Otherwise, proceed to compile
the compiler:

@example
make -k MAKE='make -k TARGET_LIBGCC2_CFLAGS=-Dinhibit_libc' cross 
make -k LANGUAGES=c install
@end example

The reason @samp{make -k} is required is because some parts of the gcc
toolkit may fail to build, but the compiler itself may be OK.

The @option{-Dinhibit_libc} option is required when you are building
the compiler in the absence of a MIPS C library, as is often the case
with VMIPS users.

Do not be alarmed by errors in building or installing the compiler;
the cross compiler install interface is less than polished.

@item You should be able to use the newly-installed  compiler to compile
(but not link) a program that does not use any C library functions.
If this works, you should be able to use the cross tools you have just
built for VMIPS.

@item If you want to use the GNU debugger (GDB) to debug MIPS programs running
on VMIPS, you can build that now.

@enumerate
@item Download a copy of the GNU debugger from any GNU mirror, or from
the URL:
@display
@url{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/gdb/}
@end display
We recommend version 6.0 or later. Download the file @file{gdb-6.0.tar.gz}.

@item Unpack the file and change to the directory @file{gdb-6.0}.
@item Type the following commands to configure and build GDB:
@example
./configure --prefix=/opt/mips --target=mipsel-ecoff
make
make install install-info
@end example

@item You can now use the newly installed @file{mipsel-ecoff-gdb} to debug
programs with VMIPS, as described in the ``Debugging'' section of the manual.
@end enumerate

@item If you want to build a MIPS C library, you can also do that now, but
it is not strictly required for many useful VMIPS tasks.

Here is how to build the uClibc C library for use with VMIPS:

As noted in the uClibc INSTALL file, you will need Linux kernel
sources.  Just pick a recent version of Linux 2.4; you can download it
from @url{http://www.kernel.org} or one of its mirrors, if you don't have
it handy.  You will need to configure (but not build) the Linux kernel for
MIPS. Here's how:

@itemize
@item Edit @file{linux/Makefile}, setting @var{ARCH} to @samp{mips} and setting
@var{CROSS_COMPILE} to a value that corresponds to the path where your MIPS
cross compiler is installed, for example: @samp{/opt/mips-elf/bin/mips-elf-}
(this is just like @option{mipstoolprefix} in your @file{vmipsrc} file).

@item Copy @file{arch/mips/defconfig} to @file{.config}.

@item Run @samp{make oldconfig} and @samp{make dep}.
@end itemize

Next, download uClibc from @url{http://www.uclibc.org}, and unpack it
next to the Linux kernel sources. The last version we tested was 0.9.29.
Read the @file{INSTALL} file in that distribution.

When you configure uClibc with @samp{make config}, be sure to pick @samp{mips}
as your Target Architecture, and @samp{Generic (MIPS I)} as your Target
Processor. Be sure to pick the correct endianness (that is, the one which
corresponds to the default endianness of your cross tools.) You should be sure
to answer yes to 'Target CPU has a memory management unit (MMU)' and no to
'Enable floating point number support', because current versions of VMIPS
do not include floating-point support.  If you are intending to use uClibc
to build ROMs, you will probably want to turn off position-independent code
and shared library support.  Turn on only those other features of uClibc
as you expect you will need.

Create a new directory into which uClibc will be installed.
This will be your @var{PREFIX}.

Run @samp{make CROSS=/opt/mips-elf/bin/mips-elf-} to build uClibc. For
@var{CROSS}, you should use the same value as you used for @var{CROSS_COMPILE}
in the Linux Makefile, above.

Run @samp{make CROSS=... PREFIX=... RUNTIME_PREFIX=/ DEVEL_PREFIX=/usr/
install} to install it, specifying the same @var{CROSS} value and
the name of the directory created earlier as @var{PREFIX}.
In the directory you specified for @var{PREFIX},
you will now have @file{usr/include} and @file{usr/lib}
subdirectories. You will now want to rebuild GCC, specifying these directories
using the @samp{--with-headers} and @samp{--with-libs} options to the GCC @samp{configure} script, respectively.
This will cause the directories to be copied to

@itemize
@item @var{prefix}/@var{target-triplet}/lib  (for libraries)
@item @var{prefix}/@var{target-triplet}/sys-include  (for includes)
@end itemize

@end enumerate

@node Reporting Bugs, Future Directions, Installation, Top
@appendix Reporting Bugs

We are always interested in hearing about VMIPS bugs.
Please send mail to @code{vmips@@dgate.org} and tell us about them.
Please include at least the following information:

@itemize @bullet
@item your operating system
@item your host processor type
@item your C++ and C compiler type and version
@item the version of VMIPS you are using
@item how you configured VMIPS
@item how to trigger the bug
@item what you expected to see
@item how what you saw differed from what you expected to see
@item how you think it could be fixed (send a patch if you have one)
@end itemize

@node Future Directions, Release History, Reporting Bugs, Top
@appendix Future Directions

The following is a list of things we would like to add to VMIPS. Please get in
touch with us if you think you would be willing to help.

@itemize @bullet
@item Cache and DMA support in the memory subsystem.

@item A just-in-time translator from MIPS machine code to the host's
machine code. X86 and PowerPC would probably be the first hosts to target.

@item Add meaningful bindings to an extension language such as Tcl/Tk.
In particular, it should be possible to read or write option values,
modify the configuration of the machine (by attaching or removing devices,
for example), and type commands interactively to VMIPS.  There should
be some provision for refreshing cached option values if the extension
language changes them.

@item Modularize the devices, and potentially even the CPU and memory mapper
using a shared-library plug-in model.

@item Make it so that the debugger can be attached and detached at any
time, without the user having had to think of it beforehand and supply
the debug option. Delay the debugging interface initialization until a
connection is received?

@item Graphical user interface with register and memory display and editing,
support for loading, running, and stepping programs, and setting breakpoints.

@item Extend the current executable loader (in vmips/exeloader.cc) to support:
@itemize
@item loading ELF-format files
@item loading files into user space (This will require some sort of built-in
TLB-miss handling.)
@end itemize

@item Support for non-English languages using NLS.

@item A reasonable FPU emulator.

@item ROM monitor network booting support.

@item Full MIPS32 support.

@item Checkpoint and restart of simulations.

@item Develop a patch for gas to support software register names.  gas supports
$sp and $gp but not, say, $t0.

@item Consolidate some of the .h files that just contain huge lists of useful
constants.

@end itemize

@node Release History, References, Future Directions, Top
@appendix Release History

vmips-1.5.1 was released on 20 August 2018.
User-visible changes in version 1.5 (since version 1.5.1):

@itemize @bullet
@item Bug fixes:

@item A pair of time calculations in the clock device were revised to
avoid triggering compile-time errors in newer C++11-compliant compilers.
@end itemize

vmips-1.5 was released on 17 November 2014.
User-visible changes in version 1.5 (since version 1.4.1):

@itemize @bullet
@item New features/improvements:

@item VMIPS now includes a basic direct-mapped cache simulation. The cache
isolation and cache swap bits in the CP0 Status register are now
honored.

@item The boot monitor distributed with VMIPS now sets up a dummy @code{argv[0]}
value for the loaded program. Also, it halts by entering an infinite
loop rather than attempting to execute a @samp{break} instruction when
it encounters an unexpected exception.

@item The setup assembly routine distributed with VMIPS has been made
more TLB-friendly. Identity virtual-to-physical mappings for the
first few pages of physical RAM are installed in the TLB at program
start time.

@item When @option{-o excmsg} is on, TLB miss addresses will be printed to
stderr.

@item When @option{-o ttydev=stdout} is specified, simulated program output
will be sent to VMIPS's standard output, even if it is not a tty.

@item The interactor can now disassemble memory. Also, stepping in the
interactor now prints the PC after each step.

@item VMIPS now supports more of the GDB remote serial protocol, in support of
the GDB @command{info threads} and @command{detach} commands. The
debug protocol TCP port is now configurable via the @option{-o
debugport} option. Also, if something halts the program while the
debugger interface is active, VMIPS will tell GDB that the program
exited.

@item Bug fixes:

@item A bug was fixed in the debugger interface where disconnecting from
the debugger socket could cause vmips to enter an infinite loop.

@item The interactor will refuse to dump raw memory words at non-word-aligned
addresses.

@item The CP0 Cause register IP field is now recomputed whenever the
register is read, rather than only when exceptions happen. This
makes polling loops with interrupts disabled work correctly.

@item A bug was fixed in the DECstation-compatible clock device which was
preventing some of its registers from being zeroed properly.

@item Some endianness bugs were fixed in the generic memory-mapped device
code and in the DECstation-compatible serial device.
@end itemize

vmips-1.4.1 was released on 7 May 2013.
User-visible changes in version 1.4.1 (since version 1.4):

@itemize @bullet
@item Problems compiling VMIPS with gcc 4.7.x have been fixed.

@item An error has been fixed in the documentation regarding the installed
location of the canned setup code.

@item An error has been fixed in the Makefiles which was preventing the
canned setup code from being installed.

@item An error has been fixed in the Makefiles which was preventing
CFLAGS and LDFLAGS from being set correctly in some cases.
@end itemize

vmips-1.4 was released on 29 January 2012.
User-visible changes in version 1.4 (since version 1.3.2):

@itemize @bullet
@item A new interaction facility was implemented. This allows you
to suspend the simulation, print registers and memory, and then
continue by running or single-stepping, without needing to use a
full-fledged debugger.

@item Some of the memory-mapped I/O devices have had endianness
bugs fixed and debugging printouts removed.

@item Certain coprocessor zero branch instructions no longer
unnecessarily cause reserved instruction exceptions.

@item Other minor optimizations.
@end itemize

vmips-1.3.2 was released on 27 March 2007.
User-visible changes in version 1.3.2 (since version 1.3.1):

@itemize @bullet
@item A bug was fixed in the code which responded to address-translation
exceptions by loading the CP0 Context register. It was loading the
wrong virtual page number.

@item Problems compiling VMIPS with gcc 4.1.x have been fixed.

@end itemize

vmips-1.3.1 was released on 5 January 2005.
User-visible changes in version 1.3.1 (since version 1.3):

@itemize @bullet
@item VMIPS now compiles and passes most of its regression tests
under Microsoft Windows using Cygwin. There is one known failure
(misc-tests/echo), but the failure stems from the testsuite, not VMIPS;
I suspect that my old version of Expect is at fault.

@item The build status report script, @file{buildstat.sh}, has been
removed from the distribution.  (Since it was broken in version 1.3 and
no one complained, we're assuming that no one will miss it much!)

@item Two bugs in the testsuite that could have led to spurious test
failures have been fixed.
@end itemize

vmips-1.3 was released on 8 October 2004.
User-visible changes in version 1.3 (since version 1.2.2):

@itemize @bullet
@item The VMIPS code base has been cleaned up substantially. The most
important visible effect of this is that VMIPS compiles much more quickly now.

@item A new, experimental executable-file loader has been integrated. Presently
it is only usable for loading ECOFF files into the kernel segments
(0x80000000-0xbfffffff). The ROM monitor has a new @command{call} command you
can use to take advantage of this.

@item Vmipstool can now disassemble binary instructions from the command
line, e.g.  @samp{vmipstool --disassemble-word <pc> <instr>}.

@item The @option{excmsg} option used to report all exceptions, including
things like clock interrupts. This made using @option{excmsg} in any
nontrivial kernel code almost impossible. Now you must also specify
'reportirq' to get reports of interrupt exceptions.

@item The @option{haltjrra} option has been removed.

@item The DECstation 5000/200-compatible CSR device now supports delivery
of interrupts from devices attached to CSR interrupt lines, such as the DZ11
serial device.

@item The DZ11 serial device now supports interrupt-driven I/O properly. It
previously only worked correctly if polling was used.

@item The documentation has received the usual slight adjustments. In
addition, the test-suite documentation has been extensively revised and
integrated into the programmer's manual.

@item The options-processing code has been revised slightly to print a better
error message when an invalid option is specified.
@end itemize

vmips-1.2.2 was released on 23 August 2004.
User-visible changes in version 1.2.2 (since version 1.2.1):

@itemize @bullet
@item A bug in the Makefiles and configure scripts has been fixed, where
some files would not be installed if you didn't configure with cross
compilation tools (using @option{--with-mips}).

@item Vladimir Machulsky found and fixed a bug in the debugger interface,
where the register file would be sent to gdb incorrectly. Thanks!

@item VMIPS will no longer abort and dump core when bad command-line
rguments
are passed to it.  Instead, it will print an error message and exit with
a non-zero exit code.

@item A bug in the command-line option processor was fixed, where using a
completely empty @file{~/.vmipsrc} or the @samp{-F /dev/null} option could cause
the options parser to parse garbage, usually resulting in harmless,
but annoying error messages.
@end itemize

vmips-1.2.1 was released on 26 July 2004.
User-visible changes in version 1.2.1 (since version 1.2):

@itemize @bullet
@item Fixed a bug where delay slot execution could be triggered even when
emulating a malformed jr (jump-register) instruction.

@item Fixed a bug where, upon taking a TLB Miss exception, the ASID of the
page that could not be looked up would be overwritten (in the CP0 EntryHi
register) with garbage.

@item Fixed a bug in VMIPS configurations with multiple interrupt devices,
where Interrupt Pending bits of the CP0 Cause from previous interrupts could
be left asserted even if the device that asserted them had subsequently
deasserted them.

@item Fixed a bug where the memory dump file and ROM file would be opened
in text mode. They are now opened in binary mode.
@end itemize

vmips-1.2 was released on 26 June 2004.
User-visible changes in version 1.2 (since version 1.1.3):

@itemize @bullet
@item Many documentation updates have been made. Note that the documentation
has been relicensed under the MIT license, instead of the GNU FDL.

@item Many facets of VMIPS are now configurable at runtime, instead of at
compile time. For instance:

	It is now possible to build and install VMIPS without having previously
installed MIPS cross-compiler tools. In particular, VMIPS now incorporates
the portions of GNU libopcodes used to implement the MIPS disassembler,
so linking against an installed version of libopcodes from GNU binutils is
no longer necessary.

	It is now possible to switch the VMIPS CPU from big-endian to
little-endian mode or vice-versa using a command-line option.

	It is now possible to change the name of the configuration file
that VMIPS reads on startup using a command-line option. The @option{-o
configfile} option, which never worked, has been removed.

@item vmipstool now shares command-line processing code with vmips. It also
has a new --swap-words option that allows you to byteswap all the 4-byte
words in a file.

@item You can now specify numeric constants in command line options which
are multiples of 1024, 1024^2, or 1024^3 using the K, M, or G suffixes.

@item Several new emulated devices based on the DECstation 5000/200 have
been added.  In particular, it is no longer possible to disable the serial
device at compile time (or with @option{-o nousetty}), but you can choose
whether to use the DECstation serial chip or the SPIM-compatible serial
console (or neither) using new command-line options. In addition, the ROM
program distributed with VMIPS supports a "boot environment" similar to
that provided by the DECstation PROM. The new DECstation-compatible devices
have not been comprehensively validated; they should be considered "beta"
quality at this point.

@item There is a new tracing framework you can use to generate runtime
execution traces of programs that run in VMIPS. See the documentation of the
"tracing" command-line option and the other options that begin with "trace"
for more details.

@item The VMIPS interface to GDB now supports the "remote Z-packet" interface
for setting breakpoints.

@item VMIPS now prints more informative diagnostic messages about the causes
of bus errors and interrupts.

@item You can now use ^C (your terminal's Interrupt key) to stop VMIPS and
break into the debugger, if the @option{-o debug} command line option was
set, or ^\ (your terminal's Quit key) to halt VMIPS in an orderly manner at
any time.

@item The @option{--disable-debug} option to @code{configure} now strips the
compiled VMIPS binaries, although it has been documented to do this for some
time now.
@end itemize

vmips-1.1.3 was released on 24 October 2003.
User-visible changes in version 1.1.3 (since version 1.1.2):

@itemize @bullet
@item A bug in comparing large immediate constants near UINT_MAX using
the sltiu instruction has been fixed.

@item A bug where the meaning of the `dirty' bit in TLB entries was
accidentally reversed has been fixed.

@item A bug in specifying which bits are treated as writable in the CP0
EntryLo register by the tlbr instruction has been fixed. Thanks to Mingyu
Chen for pointing out these last two bugs.
@end itemize

vmips-1.1.2 was released on 20 August 2003.
User-visible changes in version 1.1.2 (since version 1.1.1):

@itemize @bullet
@item An instruction that turns on interrupts in the system control coprocessor
  (coprocessor 0) will no longer immediately take an exception if an interrupt
  is pending; now it will happen at least one instruction later.

@item When building VMIPS in debug mode, the coprocessor 0 Cause register may no
  longer contain random, non-clearable interrupt-pending bits.

@item The coprocessor 0 Cause register's interrupt-pending and coprocessor-error
  bits are now correctly updated when an exception is taken.

@item The VMIPS physical-memory manager will now allow you to place two devices
  directly adjacent to one another in memory; it used to complain that they
  overlapped, when they actually did not.

@item A typo was fixed in the testsuite documentation.
@end itemize

vmips-1.1.1 was released on 16 June 2003.
User-visible changes in version 1.1.1 (since version 1.1):

@itemize @bullet
@item A bug involving shifts by 0 or 32 bits (e.g., using instructions like srlv)
  producing incorrect results has been fixed.

@item The absence of an FPU attached to coprocessor slot 1 can now be
  detected by user programs.

@item The system control coprocessor (coprocessor 0) now returns the correct ID
  number for the R3000A processor in the PRId register.

@item Emulation of store-byte and store-halfword operations for emulated devices
  that only support store-word should now work correctly on byte-swapped
  configurations.

@item A bug in vmipstool which caused it to fail to find alternate linker scripts
  (supplied with the --ld-script option) has been fixed.

@item A gcc warning caused by a (harmless) comment in asm_regnames.h has
  been quashed.

@item A bug where little-endian vmips configurations would dump core when
  the disassembler was used (e.g., when the instdump option was turned on)
  has been fixed.

@item `configure' no longer ignores its --with-mips-include option.
@end itemize

vmips-1.1 was released on 14 March 2003.
User-visible changes in version 1.1 (since version 1.0.4):

@itemize @bullet
@item If you are using g++ to compile VMIPS, you must use g++ version 2.95
  or later. Also, you must specify the --target option to `configure',
  with an argument that matches the --target option to binutils
  `configure'. See `INSTALL'.

@item VMIPS now supports GNU standard --help and --version options.

@item The manual now includes improved documentation for using gdb and
  Insight to control VMIPS, a section on the differences between SPIM's
  console and the SPIM-compatible console device, a section on proper
  error reporting from VMIPS extensions, and many other minor
  revisions.

@item Using gdb to control VMIPS is now much more robust in the face of
  errors and exceptions.

@item VMIPS 1.1 makes it possible to use the 2nd display/keyboard channel
  of the SPIM-compatible console device, using the `ttydev2' option.

@item VMIPS now includes a halt device, which can be used to halt the
  simulator without using a special instruction.

@item VMIPS 1.1 is much faster than VMIPS 1.0.4. This is due in large part
  to the efforts of Paul Twohey, who reimplemented the clock and
  SPIM-compatible console devices, and cleaned up the code a bit.

@item The VMIPS distribution now includes a regression test suite, based on
  DejaGNU (replaces the old test_code directory). In order to support
  this, the formats of lots of random messages that VMIPS prints out
  have changed.

@item We now support 64-bit hosts (e.g., Alpha). 
@end itemize

vmips-1.0.4 was released on 28 April 2002.
User-visible changes in version 1.0.4 (since version 1.0.3):

@itemize @bullet
@item Fixed bug where the first instruction of an interrupt handler would be
  executed twice in a row. Thanks to Paul Twohey.

@item Workaround some problems in the way casts are used in VMIPS by specifying
  -fno-strict-aliasing to gcc in configure; this should help avoid
  miscompilations for now, until the code can be rewritten for cast-safety.

@item Fix bug where vmips would dereference a NULL pointer when trying to use a
  SPIMConsole device with a non-attached serial host. Thanks to Paul Twohey.

@item Reorder some tests in the SPIMConsole code for a slight speedup when
  interrupts are turned off.

@item Fix bug where virtual page numbers were being incorrectly interpreted
  by the system control coprocessor, resulting in excess TLB misses being
  generated. Thanks to Sanjeev Datla.
@end itemize

vmips-1.0.3 was released on 12 January 2002.
User-visible changes in version 1.0.3 (since version 1.0.2):

@itemize @bullet
@item Fixed bug in debugger interface; TLB translations caused by the debugger
  trying to access user space could fail if the virtual page number was
  not 0.

@item Fixed bugs in the following instructions: lb, lh, lwr, lwl, swr,
  swl, nor.

@item Clarified some especially confusing comments in the source code,
  in one of the test cases, and in the testsuite README.

@item The sample setup code now halts on all exceptions, including user TLB
  miss exceptions.

@item Fixed some warnings compiling xmboot using recent versions of gcc.
@end itemize

vmips-1.0.2 was released on 17 December 2001.
User-visible changes in version 1.0.2 (since version 1.0.1):

@itemize @bullet
@item Add warning message to man page directing the interested reader to the
  Info manual.

@item New default handling of `-o ttydev' option; manual updated.

@item /etc/vmipsrc contains only comments by default.
  These two fixes work around a bug in Darwin select(2)'s tty handling.

@item Only print host processor endianness if `-o bootmsg' is set.
  Fixes bug where `-o bootmsg' should (but doesn't) turn this message off.

@item Remove test_code/testdev.S from the branch.
  This is a test for a feature (TestDev) which wasn't distributed with 1.0.x.

@item Comment out extra tokens after #endif in test_code/@{sort.c,tester.c@}.
  Fixes bug where gcc 3.0 gives warnings compiling these files.
@end itemize

vmips-1.0.1 was released on 27 November 2001.
User-visible changes in version 1.0.1 (since version 1.0):

@itemize @bullet
@item Fixed format-string bug in vmipstool.

@item Fixed "extra tokens after #endif" warning in sample_code/asm_regnames.h.
@end itemize
 
vmips-1.0 was released on 28 October 2001.
User-visible changes in version 1.0 (since version 0.9):

@itemize @bullet
@item A standard clock device has been added.

@item The "vmipstool" front end to compilation tools was added, and most of
  the random scripts lying around have been consolidated into it.

@item The memory-mapped test device known as "TestDev" has been removed.

@item Debian and Red Hat packaging files have been added.

@item The installation procedure has been greatly improved.

@item The VMIPS manual has been completed.

@item Many, many bugs fixed as a result of a concerted attempt at testing
  everything.  Doubtless, some bugs still remain.

@item Some portability fixes.

@item Dumping of the stack (when registers are dumped) now works.

@item Many strange messages the debugger backend used to print out have been
  quelled. Also, killing the debugger connection should no longer cause
  a crash.

@item vmips now supports --help, --version and --print-config command-line
  options.

@item The SPIM-compatible console device now works better when the host
  machine is byte-swapped with respect to the MIPS target.
@end itemize

vmips-0.9 was released on 9 May 2001.
User-visible changes in version 0.9 (since version 20001014):

@itemize @bullet
@item vmips.debug is no longer built.

@item Read-only memory is now really read-only.  This allowed us to add
  debugger support for breakpoints in ROM.

@item Debugger support for exception handling -- CPU exceptions are now
  delivered to your GDB, if it is attached, giving you a chance to poke
  around before the target is made aware of the condition.

@item Many tasty configury updates, making it easier to build.

@item Miscellaneous bugs fixed in many places.

@item Branch on coprocessor 0 instructions now have defined behavior.

@item Many places which erroneously had text after #endif in the source have
  been corrected to use comments instead, allowing you to compile vmips
  with newer C++ compilers.

@item Some old test code that used to run at the beginning of every vmips
  job has been removed, so you will no longer see the familiar messages
  it printed out.
@end itemize

User-visible changes since version 20000517:

@itemize @bullet
@item Emulating a little-endian MIPS on a big-endian host passes preliminary
  tests.  Build process queries MIPS tools for their endianness
  automatically.  Builds tested on Solaris SPARC, i386 Linux, FreeBSD
  and HP-UX.  Distribution building (gmake distcheck) almost works.
@end itemize

User-visible changes since version 19991114:

@itemize @bullet
@item Polling input and output via the SPIM-compatible console device now work.
@end itemize

User-visible changes since version 19990829:

@itemize @bullet
@item Build processes seeks out MIPS tools; Installation documentation now
  briefly documents how to build cross tools. 
@end itemize

User-visible changes since version 19990823:

@itemize @bullet
@item Spim console documentation completed; first attempt at spim console code.
@end itemize

User-visible changes since version 19990801:

@itemize @bullet
@item Documentation Makefile.in has been built.

@item Some documentation has been updated.

@item VMIPS is being adapted to use GNU Autoconf and Automake.
@end itemize

@node References, Copying, Release History, Top
@appendix References

Silicon Graphics, Inc. @cite{The R10000 Microprocessor
User's Manual - Version 2.0.} Available from
@display
@url{http://techpubs.sgi.com/library/tpl/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi/hdwr/bks/
SGI_Developer/R10K_UM}
@end display
as of June 1, 2004.

@quotation
This is a good reference about a typical 64-bit MIPS processor,
and also has some useful application notes. However, the processor it
describes is currently much more advanced than the VMIPS simulation.
@end quotation

Silicon Graphics, Inc. @cite{SGI
TechPubs Library: The ABI(5) manual page.} Available from
@display
@url{http://techpubs.sgi.com/library/tpl/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?coll=0650&db=man
&fname=/usr/share/catman/p_man/cat5/abi.z}
@end display
as of June 1, 2004.

@quotation
This is a short manual page about the three prevalent MIPS ABIs
(application binary interfaces), termed O32, N32, and N64.
@end quotation

Silicon Graphics, Inc. @cite{SGI
TechPubs Library: The MIPS_EXT(5) manual page.} Available from
@display
@url{http://techpubs.sgi.com/library/tpl/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?cmd=getdoc&
coll=0650&db=man&fname=5%20mips_ext}
@end display
as of June 1, 2004.

@quotation
This short manual page is a good summary of the differences between
the various MIPS ISA levels (MIPS-II, MIPS-III, MIPS-IV).
@end quotation

Kane, Gerry, and Joe Heinrich. @cite{MIPS RISC Architecture.} Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1992. ISBN 0135904722.

@quotation
This is a good all-around reference for the 32-bit MIPS
processors which VMIPS is modelled upon, and it includes a complete list
of all the 32-bit MIPS-II instructions as well as a description of the
MIPS TLB, virtual memory, exception behavior, and caches. It is not
a particularly good reference for the 64-bit versions of the MIPS
architecture, though.
@end quotation

Sweetman, Dominic.  @cite{See MIPS Run.} San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers, 1999. ISBN 1558604103.

@quotation
This is a general reference in the style of Kane and Heinrich,
but updated for the MIPS-III, MIPS-IV, and MIPS-V ISAs, and written
in a much more experienced and less minimalist style, with attempts to
include useful pieces of MIPS lore.
@end quotation

Delorie, DJ.  DJGPP COFF Spec. October, 1996. Available from
@display
@url{http://www.delorie.com/djgpp/doc/coff}
@end display
as of June 1, 2004.

@quotation
A good online reference for the COFF file format, a form of which was heavily
used on DEC MIPS implementations.
@end quotation

Tool Interface Standard Committee.  Executable and Linking
Format Specification. Version 1.2, May 1995. Available from
@display
@url{http://www.linuxbase.org/spec/refspecs/elf/elf.pdf}
@end display
as of June 1, 2004.

@quotation
An online reference for the ELF file format, now the preferred object
file format for Unix systems.  This document is highly Intel
architecture-specific, but it provides a lot of useful background material.
@end quotation

The Santa Cruz Operation. System V Application Binary Interface: MIPS
RISC Processor Supplement, 3rd Edition, February 1996. Available at
@display
@url{ftp://www.linux-mips.org/pub/linux/mips/doc/ABI/mipsabi.pdf}
@end display
as of June 1, 2004.

@quotation
The part of the System V application binary interface guide that pertains
specifically to MIPS RISC processors.  It describes, among other things,
a position independent coding model (PIC) for
MIPS.
@end quotation

Also worth checking out is
@display
@url{http://www.mips.com/publications/index.html}
@end display
which points to many MIPS Technologies, Inc. publications.

@node Copying, Index, References, Top
@appendix Copying

VMIPS and its source code are governed by the GNU General Public License,
which you should have received a copy of along with VMIPS. It is in the
source code distribution in the file @file{COPYING}.

VMIPS's documentation is governed by the MIT license.  A copy of that license
follows:

@include copyright.texi

@node Index, , Copying, Top
@unnumbered Index

@c About Texinfo Indices
@c ---------------------
@c
@c Texinfo supports 6 indices. In the vmips manual, they are all merged into
@c a single index, namely, the concept index.  Each index has a command
@c used to add entries to it, and a two letter code used in @printindex
@c and @syncodeindex.  @printindex is used at the end of the manual to
@c print the index.  @syncodeindex is used at the beginning of the manual
@c to merge indices.
@c 
@c A "concept index" listing concepts that are discussed.  `@cindex CONCEPT'
@c makes an entry in the concept index for CONCEPT.  `cp' is the @printindex
@c code.
@c 
@c A "function index" listing functions (such as entry points of libraries).
@c `@findex FUNCTION' makes an entry in the function index for FUNCTION.
@c `fn' is the @printindex code.
@c 
@c A "variables index" listing variables (such as global variables of
@c libraries).  `@vindex VARIABLE' makes an entry in the variable index
@c for VARIABLE.  `vr' is the @printindex code.
@c 
@c A "keystroke index" listing keyboard commands.  `@kindex KEYSTROKE' makes
@c an entry in the key index for KEYSTROKE.  `ky' is the @printindex code.
@c 
@c A "program index" listing names of programs.  `@pindex PROGRAM' makes an
@c entry in the program index for PROGRAM.  `pg' is the @printindex code.
@c 
@c A "data type index" listing data types (such as structures defined
@c `@tindex DATA TYPE' makes an entry in the data type index for DATA TYPE.
@c `tp' is the @printindex code.

@printindex cp

@contents
@bye
