@c %**start of header
@c This is for the man page:
@setfilename vmipstool.info
@settitle VMIPS front end for common programming tasks.
@c %**end of header

@ignore
@c man begin SEEALSO
vmips(1), as(1), ld(1), gdb(1), 
and the Info entries for @file{gcc}, @file{as},
@file{ld}, @file{binutils} and @file{gdb}.
@c man end
@c man begin BUGS
For instructions on reporting bugs, see
the "Reporting Bugs" appendix of the Info manual.
@c man end
@c man begin AUTHOR
vmipstool was written by Brian Gaeke.
@c man end
@c man begin COPYRIGHT
@include copyright.texi
@c man end
@end ignore

@node Invoking vmipstool, Programming, Customizing, Top
@chapter Invoking vmipstool

@c man begin DESCRIPTION
@command{vmipstool} is intended to be a friendly front-end to the process
of compiling, linking, and assembling code for VMIPS using the GNU Compiler
Collection (GCC) and GNU Binutils.

Note that you do not need to use @command{vmipstool}, or even GCC, to compile
programs for VMIPS; you can use any MIPS compiler and assembler you have handy.
@c man end

The format of the vmipstool command line is as follows:

@c man begin SYNOPSIS
@example
vmipstool [ --verbose ] [ --dry-run ] --compile [ FLAGS ]
    FILE.c -o FILE.o
vmipstool [ --verbose ] [ --dry-run ] --preprocess [ FLAGS ] FILE
vmipstool [ --verbose ] [ --dry-run ] --assemble [ FLAGS ]
    FILE.s -o FILE.o
vmipstool [ --verbose ] [ --dry-run ] [ --ld-script=T ] --link
    [ FLAGS ] FILE1.o ... FILEn.o -o PROG
vmipstool [ --verbose ] [ --dry-run ] --make-rom PROG PROG.rom
vmipstool [ --verbose ] [ --dry-run ] --disassemble-rom PROG.rom
vmipstool [ --verbose ] [ --dry-run ] --disassemble-word PC INSTR
vmipstool [ --verbose ] [ --dry-run ] --disassemble PROG (or FILE.o)
vmipstool [ --verbose ] [ --dry-run ] --swap-words INPUT OUTPUT
vmipstool --help
vmipstool --version
@end example
@c man end

@c man begin OPTIONS
This is what the different command line options mean:

@table @samp
@item --help
Display this help message and exit.

@item --version
Display the version of vmipstool and exit.

@item --verbose
Echo commands as they are run.

@item --dry-run
Don't actually run anything; use with --verbose.

@item --ld-script=T
Use T as the linker script (instead of default script); use with --link.

@item --compile
Compile C code.  The remainder of the command   
line must consist of arguments to the GNU C compiler.

@item --preprocess
Preprocess C source code or assembly code. The remainder of the command   
line must consist of arguments to the GNU C preprocessor.

@item --assemble
Translate assembly code to object files. The remainder of the command   
line must consist of arguments to the GNU assembler.

@item --link
Link objects together to create an executable. The remainder of the command
line must consist of arguments to the GNU linker.

@item --make-rom
Write a program into a ROM file. The next 2 arguments are the executable and
the ROM file, respectively. 

@item --disassemble
Disassemble a relocatable object file (*.o file) or an executable.

@item --disassemble-rom
Disassemble arbitrary data, possibly including ROM files. (More
information is available with --disassemble, but it only works on programs
which have not been written into ROMs.)

@item --disassemble-word
Disassemble an instruction whose binary encoding is passed as a command-line
argument. Because instructions can have PC-relative immediate arguments, the
PC must also be specified.

@item --swap-words
Copy the input file to the output file, reversing the byte-order of each
32-bit word in the process. This can be used to translate chunks of data
from big-endian to little-endian, or vice-versa.

@end table
@c man end

@c man begin FILES
Note that @command{vmipstool} consults your @file{/etc/vmipsrc} and
@file{~/.vmipsrc} to determine where the MIPS cross compiler, assembler,
and @command{objdump} and @command{objcopy} tools are.  If you install new
cross-tools, you should edit these configuration files to reflect the new
location of the MIPS tools, and to reflect their default endianness, by
changing the settings of @option{mipstoolprefix} and @option{bigendian}.
@c man end

